CHAPTER I: OBJECTIVES

1. Objectives of the food recall procedure.
	1.1 Ensure removal of food under recall from all stages of the food chain in accordance with section 28 of the Act;
	1.2 ensure dissemination of information to concerned consumers and customers; and
	1.3 ensure retrieval, destruction or reprocessing of food under recall.

CHAPTER II: SCOPE

1. Scope of the Food Recall Procedure.—These regulations shall apply to the food or food products that are determined or prima facie considered unsafe and/or as may be specified by the Food Authority from time to time.

CHAPTER IV: FOOD RECALL PROCEDURE

1.Initiation of the food recall process
	1.1. Every food business operator must follow the food recall procedure, which includes the complete recall process, post-recall report, and follow-up action to ensure the recall's effectiveness and prevent recurrence.
	1.2. The food business operator must initiate a recall process in accordance with section 28 of the Act.
	1.3. The Chief Executive Officer of the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India or the Commissioner of Food Safety of the State or Union territory may direct the food business operator to initiate the recall process.
	1.4. The recall process may be initiated due to reports or complaints from any stakeholder. If the food business operator does not respond, the complainant or consumer may inform the Chief Executive Officer or Commissioner of Food Safety, who will determine the need for recall and instruct the food business operator.
	1.5. All food business operators in the food chain must implement the instructions relating to food recall. Failure to do so will make them liable to action under the Act, rules, or regulations.
	1.6. If a food business operator refuses to undertake a recall directed by the Chief Executive Officer or Commissioner of Food Safety, or if additional measures are required to make the recall effective, the Chief Executive Officer or Commissioner of Food Safety will take appropriate action under the Act, and the food business operator will be liable for such action.
	1.7. A recall of imported food may be initiated based on reports from health and food authorities or information received from such authorities.
	1.8. The initiation of a food recall does not preclude the Chief Executive Officer or Commissioner of Food Safety from taking further regulatory action against the concerned food business operator as required under the Act.

2. Operation of Food Recall System
	2.1. The food business operator must maintain food distribution records, including the names and addresses of suppliers and customers, nature of food, date of purchase, date of delivery, lot number, batch code, pack size, brand name, date of manufacture, date of expiry, and best before date. These records must be kept for a period of one year from the best before date or expiry date, as applicable.
	2.2. For alcoholic beverages where the declaration of the best before date is exempted under food safety regulations, records must be maintained for two years from the date or month of supply from the manufacturer.
	2.3. The food business operator must submit information as specified under Schedule I to the concerned Authority immediately, but not exceeding twenty-four hours from the time it comes to their notice that such food requires recall. The recall exercise must be initiated, and information alerts may be sent by the quickest means of communication, including fax, e-mail, and speed post. The Commissioner of Food Safety of the State or Union territory must inform the Chief Executive Officer of the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India within twenty-four hours of receipt of such information.
	2.4. The food business operator must stop the distribution of food under recall and, if necessary, stop its production without waiting for instructions from the Chief Executive Officer of the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India or the Commissioner of Food Safety of the State or Union territory to ensure consumer safety is not compromised. They must contact everyone from the raw material vendor to the final consumer of the affected food through written communication, phone, e-mail, fax, or a combination thereof. The operator must notify suppliers and any other relevant retailer or trade association and immediately identify all required product details along with any additional details that would facilitate speedy identification and recall.

3. Food Recall plan
	3.1 All food business operators engaged in the manufacture or importation or wholesale supply of food regulated under the Act must have an up-to-date recall plan. The food retailers are not required to have a food recall plan, unless they are also engaged in the manufacture or importation or wholesale supply of food.Provided that food businesses in the food service sector such as restaurants, caterers and takeaway joints are exempted from having a recall plan unless they are running multi-outlet food business chains with integrated manufacturing and distribution network.
	3.2 The food retailers and food businesses in the food service sector, which do not require to have a recall plan, shall remove the recalled stock from shelves and return it to the manufacturer, importer or wholesaler and must ensure that food under recall is separated and identified from other food until it is disposed of in accordance with the instructions provided under the recall plan.
	3.3 The recalling food business operator(s) shall formulate a detailed recall plan as part of their food safety management system as per the guidelines that may be framed by the food authority from time to time.
	3.4 At the time of actual recall being carried out, the food business operator shall submit the details of the implementation of the food recall plan to the Chief Executive Officer, Food Safety and Standards Authority of India and the Commissioner of Food Safety of the State or Union territory taking into account the food safety aspects, supervise the recall, assemble data and report on the completion of recall.
	3.5 The food business operator(s) shall ensure effective implementation of the recall process as per the formulated recall plan.

4. Recall communication
	4.1 The food business operator initiating a food recall shall promptly inform food business operator(s) in the food chain including consumers about the recall.
	4.2 Such recall communication shall be through written communication, phone, e-mail, fax, print media, electronic media (TV or Radio or Internet or combination) or a combination thereof and in case of written communication it shall be conspicuously marked “Food Recall”. The communication shall also be marked “urgent” and telephone calls or other personal communication shall be confirmed by one of the above methods and documented in an appropriate manner.
	4.3 Every Food business operator in the food chain who receives a recall communication shall immediately carry out the instructions detailed therein by the recall initiating food business operator and extend the recall to all concerned stakeholders in accordance with sub-regulations (1) and (2) .
	4.4 The food business operator shall promptly inform the consumers in the affected area of the food recall through press release, letters to the concerned parties or advertisements in the media and such press release, letter or advertisement shall be in the form of ‘Food Recall Notice’ and shall contain the following information, namely:-
		a Name of the Food Business Operator recalling the food;
		b Name of the food, brand name, pack size, batch and code number, date of manufacture, used by date or best before date;
		c The contamination or violation in the food or reason for such recall;
		d “do not consume message”;
		e Health warning and action;
		f The places or outlets where the food is found;
		g The action to be taken by the consumer;
		h Contact number for queries.
	4.5 The food business operator shall respond to queries if any from the Chief Executive Officer, Food Safety and Standards Authority of India and Commissioner of Food Safety of the State or Union territory within twenty- four hours of the receipt of the query. However detailed data, if required, may be submitted subsequently.

5. Recall status report
	5.1 The food business operator shall determine whether the recall is progressing effectively and shall submit periodic status reports to the Chief Executive Officer, Food Safety and Standards Authority of India or Commissioner of Food Safety of the State or Union territory to inform them of the progress of the recall. The frequency of such reports shall be submitted once in a week or as otherwise specified by the Chief Executive Officer, Food Safety and Standards Authority of India or Commissioner of Food Safety of the State or Union territory based on the relative urgency or gravity of the recall.
	5.2 Unless otherwise specified or not applicable in a given recall case, the recall status report shall contain the information as specified in Schedule-II.
	5.3 Recall status reports are to be discontinued when the recall is terminated by the Chief Executive Officer, Food Safety and Standards Authority of India or Commissioner of Food Safety of the State or Union territory or both, as the case may be.
	5.4 The food business operator shall retain proper and complete documentation on food recall for inspection and verification by the Chief Executive Officer, Food Safety and Standards Authority of India or Commissioner of Food Safety of the State or Union territory or both, as the case may be.

6. Food recovery
	6.1 The food business operator shall store the recovered food in an area which is separated from any other food and is identified by a label plate including prominently that “RECALLED PRODUCT NOT FIT FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION”.
	6.2 The food business operator shall maintain accurate records of the recovered food including their lot number, batch code, pack size, brand name, date of manufacture, date of expiry, best before date, and all related data. Proper recording system shall be available to ensure that recalled food is retrieved and its details are recorded.
	6.3 The food business operator may correct or re-process the recovered food, if permitted by Chief Executive Officer, Food Safety and Standards Authority of India. In all other cases, the food business operator shall ensure disposal of such food in consultation with the Chief Executive Officer, Food Safety and Standards Authority of India. A complete record of the disposal of such product shall be maintained.

7. Post-recall report
	7.1 The food business operator shall submit a post-recall report to the Chief Executive Officer, Food Safety and Standards Authority of India after completion of the recall process so as to enable the assessment of adherence to the recall procedures.
	7.2  In addition, it is necessary for the food business operator to investigate the reasons that led to such recall and taking action to prevent recurrence of the problem.

8. Termination of a recall
	8.1 The food business operator may request termination of recall by submitting a written request to the Chief Executive Officer, Food Safety and Standards Authority of India along with recall status report or post-recall report certifying that the recall was effective. The request may be made in the form specified in Schedule-III(A Form).
	8.2 A recall may be terminated when the Chief Executive Officer, Food Safety and Standards Authority of India determines that it is reasonable to believe that the food under recall has been removed and/or disposed of in an appropriate manner and that steps have been taken to ensure that such incidents do not recur and a written communication shall be sent to the food business operator within two weeks of the request submitted by the food business operator and food business operator can resume normal operations thereafter.
	8.3 In case of unsatisfactory reports, the Chief Executive Officer, Food Safety and Standards Authority of India may consider further action like stepped-up inspection, seizure or any other legal action against the food business operator.

9. Follow-up action
	9.1 The food business operators shall provide the Chief Executive Officer, Food Safety and Standards Authority of India with a report as soon as a recall is completed, in any case not later than thirty days after the completion of a recall, covering the following information, namely: -
		(a) the circumstances leading to the recall;
		(b) the action taken by the food business operator including details of any publicity;
		(c) the extent of distribution of the relevant batch in the country and overseas;
		(d) the results of the recall (quantity of stock returned, corrected, outstanding, etc.);
		(e) the proposed method of disposal or otherwise of recalled stock with record of destruction and/or correction; and
		(f) the action proposed to be implemented in future to prevent a recurrence of the problem.

10. Responsibility of the food business operator
	10.1 The food business operator shall have procedures and systems in place to identify the food businesses to whom they have supplied their food.
	10.2 The food business operator shall collaborate with the Commissioner of Food Safety of the State or Union territory or the Food Authority on action taken to avoid or reduce risks posed by the specific batch or lot or code of food, which they supply or have supplied.
	10.3 The food business operator shall remove the food from sale or distribution, when requested by the Commissioner of Food Safety of the State or Union territory or the Food Authority, as the case may be.

11. Responsibility of the Commissioner of Food Safety of the State or Union territory
	11.1. The Commissioner of Food Safety of the State or Union territory shall supervise the recall by the food business operator and inspect the operator's recall capability after receiving the recall alert information. They are also responsible for the following:
   		(a) Inspect the suspected or determined unsafe food after receiving a complaint from the consumer, take action as per the provisions of the Act, and advise the food business operator, in consultation with the Food Authority wherever required, to recall such food.
   		(b) Prepare and issue a media release for immediate use by the media in recalls involving consumers, and where required, in consultation with the food business operator.
   		(c) Conduct audit checks when it is determined that the food business operator is unable to ensure the effectiveness of its recall.
   		(d) Give instructions on the frequency of reporting the condition of recall, subject to the urgency of the case, and monitor the recall progress of the food business operator(s).
   		(e) Supervise the food business operator in the completion of recall and assess their recall report.
   		(f) For foods imported into India that are recalled products in other markets, or where Indian-made foods are subject to recall or rejection in the country of export and returned to India, the Food Authority or the Commissioner of Food Safety of the State or Union territory shall, in consultation with the concerned food business operator, determine the fate of such products for disposal or reprocessing at the port or otherwise, and shall review the recall plan for the exported foods and advise the health authorities in the importing countries about such recall.
	11.2. The Commissioner of Food Safety of the State or Union territory shall inform the Food Authority about the execution of the above process and follow such instructions as the Food Authority may deem appropriate.

12. Responsibility of the Food Authority
	12.1 The Food Authority shall guide and supervise the Commissioner of Food Safety of the State or Union Territory in executing the Recall Plan. Where necessary, it may assess the relevant reports submitted by the food business operator and give instructions as required.
	12.2 The Food Authority may establish a web-based facility titled 'Food Recall Portal' on its website, assigning a unique identification number to each recall for monitoring and providing information to consumers about such recall.
	12.3 The Food Authority may also publicize the recall when it considers that the public needs to be alerted about the health hazard, depending on the seriousness of the situation, and it shall keep the concerned food business operator(s) aware of the same.










