4. General Requirements. - (1) Every pre-packaged food shall be labeled with information as required under
these regulations unless otherwise provided;
(2) When a food product is sold through e-commerce or any other direct selling means, the mandatory requirements of
the label as given in these regulations shall be provided to the consumer through appropriate means before sale except
‘batch number/ lot number, best before, use by date, expiry date, date of manufacturing/ packing;
(3) Pre-packaged food shall not be described or presented on any label or in any labelling in a manner that is false,
misleading or deceptive or is likely to create an erroneous impression regarding its character in any respect;
(4) Any information or pictorial device written, printed, or graphic matter may be displayed on the label provided that
it is not in conflict with the requirements of these regulations;
(5) The particulars of declaration required under these Regulations to be specified on the label shall be in English or
Hindi in Devnagri script:
Provided that nothing herein contained shall prevent the use of any other language in addition to the
language required under this regulation:
Provided further that the information provided in such other language shall not contradict the information on
the label in the English or Hindi;
(6) Label on pre-packaged foods shall be applied in such a manner that it will not become separated from the
container;
(7) Contents on the label shall be clear, unambiguous, prominent, conspicuous, indelible and readily legible by the
consumer under normal conditions of purchase and use;
(8) Where a package is provided with an outside container or wrapper and such container or wrapper is displayed for
retail sale, it shall also contain all the declarations which are required to appear on the package except where such
container or wrapper itself is transparent and the declarations on the package(s) are easily readable through such
outside container or wrapper.
Note: for the purpose of this clause in case of a transparent multi-unit package containing several retail units the label
of at least one retail unit containing the declarations required under these regulations shall be visible.

5. Labelling Requirements. -In addition to general requirements specified in Regulation 4, every package shall carry
the following information on the label, namely,-
(1) The Name of Food: Every package of food shall carry name of the food which indicate the true nature of the food
contained in the package, on the Front of Pack:
(a) Where a food is specified by certain essential composition under Food Safety and Standards
Regulations made under the Act, that establishes its identity the name provided therein shall be
used;
(b) In the absence of such name, either a common or usual name or an accompanying description of true
nature of food shall be used;
(c) It may additionally have a “coined”, “fanciful”, “brand” or “trade name” subject to compliance of
Food Safety & Standards (Advertising and Claims) Regulation 2018.
(2) List of Ingredients: Except for single ingredient foods, a list of ingredients shall be declared on the label in the
following manner:-
(a) The list of ingredients shall contain an appropriate title, such as the term “Ingredients/List of
Ingredients”;
(b) The name of ingredients used in the product shall be listed in descending order of their composition
by weight or volume, as the case may be at the time of its manufacture;
(c) A food additive carried over into a food in an amount sufficient to perform a technological function
in that food as a result of the use of raw material or other ingredients in which the additives was used
shall be included in the list of ingredient;
(d) A specific name shall be used for ingredients in the list of ingredients:
Provided that for ingredients falling in the respective classes, the following class titles may
be used, namely: -

1. For Edible vegetable oil, give the name of the specific edible oil such as mustard oil, groundnut oil, etc. 
2. For Edible vegetable fat, give the type of vegetable fat (interesterified vegetable fat, fractionated fat, hydrogenated oils, partially hydrogenated oils, margarine and fat spreads, such as mixed fat spreads, vegetable fat spreads).
3. For Animal fat/oil other than milk fat, give the name of the source of fat; pork fat, lard, and beef fat or extract thereof shall be declared by specific means.
4. For Starches, other than chemically modified starches, use the term Starch.
5. For all species of fish where the fish constitutes an ingredient of another food and provided that the labelling and presentation of such food does not refer to a species of fish, use the term Fish.
6. For all types of meat where such meat constitutes an ingredient of another food and provided that the labelling and presentation of such food does not refer to a specific type of meat, give the name of the source of meat.
7. For all types of cheese where cheese or a mixture of cheese constitutes an ingredient of another food and provided that the labelling and presentation of such food does not refer to a specific type of cheese, use the term Cheese.
8. For all spices, herbs, and condiments and their extracts, use the term Spice and condiments, herbs, or mixed spices/condiments as appropriate.
9. For all types of gum or preparations used in the manufacture of gum base for chewing gum and bubble gum, use the term Gum base.
10. For anhydrous dextrose and dextrose monohydrate, use the term Dextrose or Glucose.
11. For sucrose, use the term Sugar.
12. For all types of caseinates, use the term Caseinates.
13. For press, expeller, or refined cocoa butter, use the term Cocoa butter.
14. For all crystallized fruits/vegetables, use the term Crystallized fruit/vegetable.
15. For all milk and milk products derived solely from milk, use the term Milk solids (source may also be given).
16. For cocoa bean, cocoa nib, cocoa mass, cocoa press cakes, cocoa powder (fine/dust), use the term Cocoa solids.
17. For all vitamins and their compounds, use the term Vitamin(s).
18. For all minerals and trace elements and their compounds/salts, use the term Mineral(s) and/or trace element(s).

(e) Where an ingredient is itself the product of two or more ingredients, such a compound ingredient shall be
declared, by their specific names;
(i) as such, in the list of ingredients, provided that it is immediately accompanied by a list, in brackets,
of its ingredients in descending order of proportion (m/m)at the time of manufacture of such compound
ingredients:
or
(ii) by declaring all of the ingredients of compound ingredient as if they were individual ingredients of
the final food:
 Provided that where a compound ingredient constitutes less than 5 per cent. of the food, the ingredients,
other than food additives that serve the technological function in the food products, need not be declared;
(f) Added water shall be declared in the list of ingredients except in cases where water forms part of an
ingredient, such as, brine, syrup or broth, used in the compound food and so declared in the list of ingredients:
Provided that water or other volatile ingredients evaporated in the course of manufacture need not be declared;
Provided further that in case of dehydrated or condensed food, which are intended to be reconstituted by
addition of water, the ingredients in such reconstituted food shall be declared in descending order of weight or
volume as the case may be, and shall contain a statement such as “Ingredients of the product when prepared in
accordance with the directions on the label”;
(g) The ingoing percentage of an ingredient (including compound ingredients or categories of ingredients), by
weight or volume as appropriate, at the time of manufacture, shall be disclosed for foods sold as a mixture or
combination where the ingredient:
(i) is emphasized as present on the label through words or pictures or graphics; or
(ii) is not within the name of the food but, is essential to characterise the food and is expected to be
present in the food by consumers, and if the omission of the quantitative ingredient declaration will
mislead or deceive the consumer:
Provided that such disclosures are not required where -
(i) the ingredients are used as flavouring agents including spices or condiments
or herbs or their extracts or mixed masalas or seasonings;
(ii) a reference in the name of food to an ingredient or category of ingredients, if
that reference would not mislead or deceive or would not be likely to create an
erroneous impression to the consumer regarding the character of the food
because the variation in quantity of ingredient(s) between products is not
necessary to characterize the food or distinguish it from similar foods;
(iii) the drained net weight is indicated on the label as required, except in case
of mixed ingredients products where certain ingredient(s) is/are emphasized.;
(iv) specific provisions are stipulated under these regulations for a food;
(v) a pictorial representation of a serving suggestion is made for consumer
information and use. 

(vi) Added Micro-Nutrients and their preparations like vitamins, minerals,
amino acids that are subject to a nutrition declaration as per requirements
specified in regulation 5 (3).
(3) Nutritional information.-
(a) For the purposes of these regulations, nutritional information is a description intended to inform the
consumer of nutritional properties of the food and the following definitions shall be applicable:
(i) ‘sugars’ means all monosaccharides (glucose, fructose, etc.) and disaccharides (maltose, sucrose,
lactose, etc.).
(ii) ‘added sugars’means monosaccharides and disaccharides added to foods and beverages
(iii) ‘fat’ means total lipids including saturated fat, monounsaturated fat, polyunsaturated fat and trans
fat.
(A) ‘Saturated fats’ means fatty acids without double bonds.
(B) ‘Monounsaturated fats’ means fatty acids with one cis double bond.
(C) ‘Polyunsaturated fats’ means fatty acids with cis-cis methylene interrupted double bonds.
(D) ‘Trans fat’ means all the geometrical isomers of monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fatty
acids having non-conjugated, interrupted by at least one methylene group, carbon-carbon
double bonds in the trans configuration.
(iv) “dietary fiber” means carbohydrate polymers with a degree of polymerization (DP) not lower
than three, which are not hydrolysed by the endogenous enzymes in the small intestine of
humansand the same consists of one or more of-
(A) Edible carbohydrate polymers naturally occurring in the food as consumed;
(B) Carbohydrate polymers, which have been obtained from food raw material by physical,
enzymatic or chemical means;
(C) Synthetic carbohydrate polymers.
(v) ‘nutrient’ means a constituent of food, which:
(A) provides energy ; or
(B) has specific metabolic or physiological functions; or
(C) is needed for growth and development and maintenance of healthy life;
(b) Nutritional Information per 100g or 100ml or per single consumption pack of the product and per serve
percentage (%) contribution to Recommended Dietary Allowance calculated on the basis of 2000kcal energy,
67 g total fat, 22 g saturated fat, 2 g trans fat, 50 g added sugar and 2000 mg of sodium (5 g salt) requirement
for average adult per day, shall be given on the label containing the following: —
(i) energy value (kcal);
(ii) the amounts of
(A) Protein (g);
(B) Carbohydrate (g) and Total Sugars (g), added sugars (g);
(C) “Provided that saturated fat and trans fat to be given only if total fat content is more than
0.5% in final food.
“Provided further that cholesterol content to be given only for products containing fats of
animal origin and where total fat content is more than 0.5%.”

(D) Sodium (mg);
(iii) Wherever, numerical information on vitamins and minerals is declared, it shall be expressed in
metric units;
(iv) Nutrition information panel shall include the amount of food in gram (g) or millilitre (ml) for
reference beside the serving measure and the number of servings in the package.

Explanation: “serving or serve size” means an amount of food customarily consumed per eating
occasion or as defined on the label which is expressed in metric unit. Additionally, it may also be given
in common household measures like tea spoon, table spoon, cup that is appropriate to the food.
 Provided that the food claimed to be enriched with nutrients, such as, minerals, proteins,
vitamins, amino acids or enzymes shall give the quantities of such added nutrients on the label.
(c) The following foods are exempted from mandatory nutritional labelling:
(i) Unprocessed products that comprise a single ingredient;
(ii) Processed products which the only processing they have been subjected to is maturing
and that comprise a single ingredient;
(iii) Waters intended for human consumption, including those where the only added
ingredients are carbon dioxide;
(iv) A herb, a spice or mixtures thereof/Curry Powder except Sprinkler masala (masalas meant
for direct consumption);
(v) Salt and salt substitutes;
(vi) Table top sweeteners;
(vii) Coffee extracts and chicory extracts, whole or milled coffee beans and whole or milled
decaffeinated coffee beans, coffee, decaffeinated coffee, soluble coffee powder, coffee
chicory mixture;
(viii) Herbal and fruit infusions, tea, decaffeinated tea, instant or soluble tea or tea extract,
decaffeinated instant or soluble tea or tea extract, which do not contain other added
ingredients than flavourings which do not modify the nutritional value of the tea;
(ix) Fermented vinegars and substitutes for vinegar, including those where the only added
ingredients are flavourings;
(x) Flavourings, Food additives, Processing aids, Food enzymes, Gelatine, Yeast;
(xi)  Chewing gum and bubble gum;
(xii) Alcoholic Beverages.
(xiii) Foods for Special Dietary Uses (FSDU), Foods for Special Medical Purposes(FSMP),
subject to the compliance of requirements specified in the Food Safety and Standards
(Health Supplements, Nutraceuticals, Food for Special Dietary Use, Food for Special
Medical Purpose, Functional Food and Novel Food) Regulations, 2016.
 Provided that every package of edible oils, interesterified vegetable fat, both hydrogenated or
partially hydrogenated oils, edible fats, margarine and fat spreads (mixed fat spread and vegetable fat spread)
and package of food in which fats, oils and fat emulsions is used as an ingredient shall declare the quantity of
trans fat content and saturated fat content on the label.
 Provided that the content of saturated fat and trans fat may be declared on the label as “not more
than”.
Provided further that every package of edible oils, interesterified vegetable fat, both hydrogenated or
partially hydrogenated oils, edible fats, margarine and fat spreads (mixed fat spread and vegetable fat spread)
shall declare the quantity of monounsaturated fatty, polyunsaturated fatty acid, omega-3 fatty acid and omega-6
fatty acid content on the label.
However, nutritional information shall be required in the above-mentioned products if a nutrition or
health claim is made on the label.
(d) The compliance to quantity of declared nutrients on the label shall have the tolerance of maximum minus 10
percent of the value for that nutrient declared on the label at any point in time within declared shelf life of the
product.
(e) Calculation of Nutrients:
(i) Calculation of Energy: The amount of energy to be listed should be calculated by using the
following conversion factors:
(A) Carbohydrates 4 kcal/g
(B) Polyols except Erythritol 2 kcal/g

(C) Erythritol 0kcal/g
(D) Protein 4 kcal/g
(E) Fat 9 kcal/g
(F) Alcohol (Ethanol) 7 kcal/g
(G) Organic acid 3 kcal/g
(H)Dietary fibre 2kcal/g
(ii) Calculation of Protein - The amount of protein to be listed should be calculated using the formula:
Protein = Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen x 6.25 (Unless a different factor scientifically justified, may be
used)
Provided that for calculating protein content in milk a conversion factor of 6.38 needs to be used.
 (f) Nutritional information may additionally be provided in the form of Barcode/Global Trade Identification
Number (GTIN).
(4) Declaration regarding Veg or Non veg.-
(a) Every package of Non-Vegetarian Food containing ingredients including food additives, processing aids of
animal origin shall bear a declaration to this effect made by a symbol and colour code as stipulated below.
The symbol shall consist of a brown colour filled triangle inside a square with brown outline having the sides
not less than the minimum size specified in the Table mentioned in the regulation 5 (4) (c), as indicated
below:
 Brown colour
 Provided where any article of food contains egg only as Non-Vegetarian ingredient, the
manufacturer, or packer or seller may give declaration to this effect in addition to the said symbol.
(b) Every package of Vegetarian Food containing ingredients including food additives, processing aids of plant
origin shall bear a declaration to this effect by a symbol and colour code as stipulated below. The symbol
shall consist of a green colour filled circle inside a square with green outline having the diameter not less
than the minimum size specified in the Table mentioned in the regulation 5 (4) (c), as indicated below:
Green colour
(c) Size of the Vegetarian/Non-vegetarian logo:

1. For an area of the principal display panel up to 100 square cm, the minimum size of the diameter of a circle should be 3 mm, the minimum size of each side of a triangle should be 2.5 mm, and the minimum size of each side of a square should be 6 mm.
2. For an area of the principal display panel above 100 to 500 square cm, the minimum size of the diameter of a circle should be 4 mm, the minimum size of each side of a triangle should be 3.5 mm, and the minimum size of each side of a square should be 8 mm.
3. For an area of the principal display panel above 500 to 2500 square cm, the minimum size of the diameter of a circle should be 6 mm, the minimum size of each side of a triangle should be 5 mm, and the minimum size of each side of a square should be 12 mm.
4. For an area of the principal display panel above 2500 square cm, the minimum size of the diameter of a circle should be 8 mm, the minimum size of each side of a triangle should be 7 mm, and the minimum size of each side of a square should be 16 mm.

(d) Declaration regarding Veg. or Non-Veg shall also be prominently displayed as provided in this regulation on
the pamphlets, leaflets and advertisements in any media.
The symbol shall be prominently displayed on the package having contrast background on principal display
panel, just close in proximity to the name or brand name of the producton front of pack.

Provisions of regulations 5(4)(a) and 5(4)(b) shall not apply in respect of mineral water, packaged
drinking water, carbonated water, alcoholic beverages, liquid milk, milk powders and honey.
(5) Declaration regarding Food Additives.-
Functional classes for food additives shall be declared together with the specific name(s) or recognized International
Numbering System (INS) as specified in Food Safety and Standards (Food Product Standards and Food Additives)
Regulations, 2011 in the list of the ingredients;
(a) Every food to which a flavouring agent is added in accordance with the Regulation 3.3.1(1) of Food Safety
and Standards (Food Product Standards and Food Additives) Regulations, 2011, it shall be declared in the list
of ingredients provided that:
i) In case of artificial flavoring substances the common name of the flavor shall be declared;
ii) In case of natural flavoring substances or nature identical substances the class name of flavors shall
be declared.
(6) Declaration of name and complete address.-
(a) The name and complete address of the brand owner, whether or not, he himself is the manufacturer,
marketer, packer or bottler, as the case may be, shall be declared on the label. Such name and address shall be
preceded by the qualifying words “Manufactured by (Mfg by, Mfd by)” or “Marketed by (Mkt by)” or
“Manufactured & Marketed by” or “Packed & Marketed by” as the case may be.
In case of alcoholic beverages ,“Bottled by” or “Blended and Bottled by “or “Imported and Bottled by”. Or
“distilled and bottled by” may also be declared on label.
(b) Where an article of food is imported into India, the package of food shall also carry the name and complete
address of the importer in India.
Provided further that where any food article manufactured outside India is packaged or bottled in
India, the package containing such food article shall also bear on the label, the name of the country of origin
of the food article and the name and complete address of the importer and the premises of packing or bottling
in India.
(7)FSSAI logo and license number.-
(a) The FSSAI logo and license number under the Act shall be displayed on the label of the food package in
contrast color to the background as below:
Lic. No. XXXXXXXXXXXXXX
(b) The FSSAI logo and license number of the brand owner shall be displayed on the label. In addition, the
license number of the manufacturer or marketer or packer or bottler, as the case may be, if different from the
brand owner, shall also be displayed on the label.
(c) In case of imported food products, the importer shall display FSSAI logo and license number along with
name and address of importer.
(d) Every food business operator shall display on all its premises, where food is stored, processed, distributed or
sold, the Registration/Licence No. as the case may be or Food Safety Display Board if specified, along with
other information as may be specified by the Food Authority from time to timeat a prominent place in the
premises.
(e) Fortified food and organic food shall be marked with the logo as specified in schedule I of these regulations.
FSSAI may specify logo for any other food as decided from time to time.
(8) Net quantity, Retail Sale Price and Consumer Care details.-
Declaration and manner of declarationof Net quantity, Retail Sale Price and Consumer Care details shall be
as provided in Legal Metrology Act, 2009 (1 of 2010) and the Rules made there under.
(9) Lot/Code/Batch identification.-
A batch number or code number or lot number shall be declared on the label.
(10) Date Marking.-
(a) “Date of manufacture or packaging” and “Expiry/Use by” shall be declared on the label. However,
expression “Best before” may also be used as optional or additional information.
(b) The manner of declaration of date of manufacture or packaging/Expiry/Use by/Best Before shall be as
follows:
(i) the day, month and year using the DD/MM/YY format for products with a short shelf life of up to 3
months; the month and the year for products with a shelf life of more than three months, shall be
declared in un-coded numerical sequence except that the month shall be indicated by capital letters and
abbreviations (at least first three letters of the month) may be used.
“Provided that for products with shelf life of more than three months, the “DD/MM/YY” format
may also be used.”
(c) In addition to the expiry or Use by, any special conditions for the storage of the food shall be declared on the
label if the validity of the date depends thereon. If required, storage conditions after opening the pack may
also be specified.
(d) Notwithstanding anything contained in this regulation, an indication of the “Expiry” shall not be required for:
(i) Fresh fruits and vegetables, including potatoes which have not been peeled, cut or similarly
treated;
(ii) All types of wine;
(iii) Alcoholic beverages containing 10% or more by volume of alcohol;
(iv) Vinegar;
(v) Sugar boiled confectionery;
(vi) Food grade salt for industrial use;
(vii) Solid sugars;
(viii) Chewing gum and bubble gum.
(e) “Date of manufacture or packaging” and “Expiry /Use by” shall be grouped together and given at one place.
(f) “Date and time of manufacture” shall be declared on packed meals served in airlines/railways/mobile catering
units.
(11) Labelling of Imported Foods.-
Labelling requirements for imported products shall be governed by the Food Safety and Standards (Import)
Regulations, 2017 in addition to the requirement mentioned in these regulations.
(12) Country of Origin for Imported Foods-
(a) The country of origin of the food shall be declared on the label of food imported into India.
(b) When a food undergoes processing in a second country which changes its nature, the country in which the
processing is performed resulting in change in HS Code at the 6 digit level shall be considered to be the county
of origin for the purposes of labelling.
(13) Instructions for use.-
(a) Instructions for use, including reconstitution, where applicable, shall be included on the label, to ensure
proper utilization of the food or where such food requires directions for reasons for health and safety (e.g.
‘Refrigerate after opening’).
(14) Declaration regarding Food allergen:
The following foods and ingredients which are known to cause allergy shall be declared separately as
Contains............................ (Name of allergy causing ingredients)
(i) Cereals containing gluten; i.e., wheat, rye, barley, oats, spelt or their hybridized strains and products of
these (To be declared as name of the cereal);
“except
(a) wheat based glucose syrups including dextrose*;
(b) wheat based maltodextrins*;
(c) glucose syrups based on barley;
(d) cereals used for making alcoholic distillates including ethyl alcohol of agricultural
origin;
Note: * The products thereof, provided these ingredients have been assessed as safe and
gluten shall not be more than 20 mg/kg.”

(ii) “Provided further that this declaration is not required in case of oils and distilled alcoholic
beverages derived from these ingredients and where the product itself is a food allergen.”

(iii) Milk & Milk products(To be declared as Milk);
(iv) Eggs and egg products (To be declared as Egg);
(v) Fish and fish products (To be declared as Fish);
(vi) Peanuts, tree nuts (e.g. almonds, walnuts, pistachio, cashew nuts) and their products (To be declared as
Nut);
(vii) Soybeans and their products (To be declared as Soy);
(viii)Sulphite in concentrations of 10mg/kg or more (To be declared as sulphite)
Provided that in case presence of ingredients due to cross contamination which are known to cause
allergy may be declared separately as May Contains.......................... (Name of allergy causing ingredients).
 Provided further that this declaration is not required in case of oils derived from these ingredients.”
Raw agricultural commodities are exempted from the allergen labelling requirements.
(15) Every package of food material sold in retail but which is not meant for human consumption example Pooja
water, Ghee for diya, Oil for Pooja etc. shall bear a declaration to this effect by a symbol as stipulated below.
The symbol shall consist of a black colour cross inside a square with black outline having the sides of square
not less than the minimum size specified in the Table mentioned in the regulation 5 (4) (c), as indicated
below:
6. Principal display panel.- (1) The information required under these regulations shall be given on the principal
display panel of the package or container and such information may be given in following manner, -
 (a) All information should be grouped together and given at one place.
 Or
 (b) The pre-printed information be grouped together and given in one place and,
 Online information or those not pre-printed be grouped together in another place.”
(2) Area of Principal Display Panel-The area of principal display panel shall not be less than:
(a) In the case of a rectangular package, forty percent of the product of height and width of the panel of such
package having the largest area;
(b) In case of cylindrical or nearly cylindrical, round or nearly round, oval or nearly oval package, forty percent
of the product of the height and average circumference of such package; or
(c) In the case of package of any other shape, twenty percent of the total surface area of the package;
(d) In the case of package having a capacity of ten cubic centimeters or less, the principal display panel may be
card or tape affixed firmly to the package and bearing the required information under these regulations.
(3) The height of any numeral and letter required under these regulations, on the principal display panel shall be as
shown in table below:
TABLE I
The area of the principal display panel up to 200 cm² requires a minimum height of numeral and letter to be 1 mm in the normal case and 2 mm when blown, formed, moulded, or perforated on the container.

The area of the principal display panel above 200 cm² up to 500 cm² requires a minimum height of numeral and letter to be 2 mm in the normal case and 4 mm when blown, formed, moulded, or perforated on the container.

The area of the principal display panel above 500 cm² up to 2500 cm² requires a minimum height of numeral and letter to be 3 mm in the normal case and 5 mm when blown, formed, moulded, or perforated on the container.

The area of the principal display panel above 2500 cm² requires a minimum height of numeral and letter to be 6 mm in the normal case and 8 mm when blown, formed, moulded, or perforated on the container.

Provided that the size of numeral and/or letters required for declaration of net weight, retail
sale price, date of expiry or best before or the use by date (wherever and as applicable) and Consumer care
details on the principal display panel shall be as provided in the Legal Metrology Act, 2009 (1 of
2010) and the rules made there under.
The width of the letter or numeral shall not be less than one -third of its height, but this proviso
shall not apply in the case of numeral “1” and letters i, I and l.

7. Mandatory Declarations.-
(1) Wherever, packaged food contains ingredients and /or additives as stated in schedule -II of these
regulations, the same shall be prominently displayed on the label. The size of numerals and letters
for the declarations/specific requirements specified in schedule -II shall not be less than 3mm based
on the letter l.
(2) The Food Authority may modify, delete or add any of the ingredients and/or additives and
corresponding declaration from time to time.
8. Exemptions from certain labelling requirements-
(1) Where the surface area of the package is not more than 100 square centimetres, the label of such package
shall be exempted from the requirements of list of ingredients, Lot Number or Batch Number or Code
Number, nutritional information, labelling of irradiated food, declaration of food additives, License no and
logo the name and complete address of the importer and instructions for use, but these information shall be given on the multi-unit packages.
(a) The 'date of manufacture' and „Use by Date or Expiry Date‟ may not be required to be
mentioned on the package having surface area of less than thirty square centimetres but this information shall be given on the multi-unit packages.;”
(2) In case of liquid products marketed in bottles, if such bottle is intended to be reused for refilling, the
requirement of list of ingredients shall be exempted, but the nutritional information specified in regulation 5(3)
shall be given on the label.
(3) In case of food with shelf-life of not more than seven days, the 'date of manufacture' may not be required to be
mentioned on the label of packaged food articles, but the 'Expiry/use by' shall be mentioned on the label by the
manufacturer or packer.
(4) In case of prepared food served for immediate consumption such as in hotels or by food service vendors or
caterers or halwais or hospitals or at religious gathering or food served in airline/railways/passenger vehicle or
any mobile unit shall accompany or display the minimum information as specified below at the point of
sale/serve of the food.
(a) Specific declarations prescribed under sub-regulations 1.1 (1), (2), (3), 1.4 (3), (4) and 1.9 of schedule II
of these regulations;
(b) information relating to allergen; and
(c) logo for veg or non-veg.
 Provided that in case of food served through vending machine the labelling requirement as prescribed
in regulation 5(3) of these regulations shall be displayed in addition to the requirements mentioned in 8(4)
above, through appropriate presentation on the outside of vending machine or through poster, leaflet or on the
container.
(5)The following labelling requirements are exempted if they are provided in a Barcode/Global Trade
Identification Number (GTIN);-
(a) Address of the brand owner whether or not, he himself is the manufacturer, marketer, packer or bottler, as
the case may be,
(b) the license number of the manufacturer or marketer or packer or bottler, as the case may be, if different
from the brand owner.
(6)For Assorted packs, Shelf life declared on assorted pack should be that of the product having the earliest shelf
life declared amongst the different pre-packaged food packed inside.
CHAPTER- 3
9. Display of information in food service establishments
(1) Food Service Establishments having Central license or outlets at 10 or more locations shall mention the calorific
value (in kcal per serving and serving size) against the food items displayed on the menu cards or boards or booklets.
Additionally, reference information on calorie requirements shall also be displayed clearly and prominently as “An
average active adult requires 2,000 kcal energy per day, however, calorie needs may vary”.

(2) Food Service Establishments shall also mention the information specified below against the food items displayed
on the menu cards or boards:
a) information relating to food allergens as prescribed under sub-regulations 5 (14) of these regulations:
Provided that the allergens may be depicted by easy to understand symbols.
b) logo for veg or non-veg;
(3) These provisions shall not be applicable to the following:
a) Event caterers and Food Service premises that operate for less than 60 days in a calendar year
(consecutively or non-consecutively).
b) Self-serve condiments that are free of charge and not listed on the menu.
c) Special-order items or modified meals and menu items as per customer’s request.
(4) Food Service Establishments shall also provide nutritional information as prescribed under sub-regulation 5(3),
specific requirements prescribed under the provisions 1.1 (1), (2), (3), 1.4 (3), (4) and 1.7 of schedule-II of these
regulations, if applicable and information relating to organic food or ingredients, if claimed, for the food items sold by
them to consumers upon request in the form of booklets or handouts or on their website.
Provided that deviation of 25 percent may be tolerated in case of nutritional information declaration.
(5) E-commerce Food Business Operators shall get the above mentioned information from respective Food Business
Operators and provide on their website wherever applicable.
(6)Nutritional information and/or ingredients information along with health messages shall be displayed where food is
served in a manner as may be required and specified by the Food Authority.
(7) The Authority may specify other food service establishments also to comply with the requirements specified in
these regulations from time to time.
CHAPTER 4
10. Labelling Requirements of non-retail container
(1) Every packaged food meant for non-retail sale shall provide the following mandatory information either on
the container or pasted on the label thereto:
(a) Name of the food;
(b) Net Quantity;
(c) FSSAI Logo and License number;
(d) Date marking;
(e) Lot No.
(f) Name and address of the manufacturer or packer (including country of origin for imported
packages)
(2) The following information if not provided on the label shall be provided in the accompanying documents:
(a) List of ingredient
(b) Declaration regarding Veg or Non-Veg
(c)Nutritional information
(3) The following labelling requirements are exempted if they are provided in a Barcode/Global Trade
Identification Number (GTIN);-
(a) Address of the brand owner whether or not, he himself is the manufacturer, marketer, packer or
bottler, as the case may be,
(b) the license number of the manufacturer or marketer or packer or bottler, as the case may be, if
different from the brand owner.

(4) Every package meant for non- retail sale shall bear a statement “NOT FOR RETAIL SALE”.
CHAPTER 5
LABELLING OF FOOD ADDITIVES WHEN SOLD AS SUCH
11. Labelling of packaged Food Additives for Retail Sale
(1) Every package of a food additive meant for retail sale to the consumer shall be labelled in accordance with the
Food Safety and Standards (Labelling and Display) Regulations, 2020 except for sub-regulation 5(1) and 5(3) of
this regulation.
(2) Additionally the label of every package of food additive shall provide the following information under these
regulations:
(a) Name of Food Additive.- The specific name as mentioned in Food Safety and Standards (Food Products
Standards and Food Additives) Regulations, 2011 and amendments thereof shall be used.
Provided that:
(i) Where such a name is not listed in the aforementioned clause the name established in international
regulations shall be used or
(ii) In other cases the common or commercial name shall be used
(iii) In the case of synthetic food colours the chemical name and the colour index of the dye stuff.
(iv) If two or more food additives are present in the package, their names shall be listed in the descending
order of their composition by weight or volume. Where one or more of the food additives is subject to
a quantitative limitation in a food covered by Food Safety and Standards (Food Products Standards
and Food Additives) Regulations 2011, and amendments thereof, the quantity or proportion of that
additive shall be stated. If food ingredients are part of the preparation, they shall be declared in the list
of ingredients in descending order of proportion by weight.
(b) Other Mandatory Declarations:
(i) Every package of a food additive sold in retail or non-retail sale shall be marked prominently with the
words “FOR USE IN FOOD”.
(ii) In the case of mixtures of flavourings, the name of each flavouring present in the mixture need not be
given but a common or generic expression “flavour” or “flavouring” may be used, together with a true
indication of the nature of the flavour.
The expression “flavour” or “flavouring” shall be qualified by the words “natural”, nature-identical”,
“artificial”, or a combination of these words, as appropriate. Provided that this qualifier does not apply to
flavour modifiers.
12. Labelling of Pre-packaged Food Additives Sold other than by Retail
Every package of a food additive meant for sale other than in Retail shall carry label in accordance to chapter
4 and regulation 10 of these regulations except the clause 10(2) (c).
13. The provision of these regulations shall supersede, if repugnant to labelling requirement prescribed in any
regulations made under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (34 of 2006).


Schedule-II
(See regulations 7 (1), 8(4) (a) and 9(4))
1. Mandatory Declarations:
(1) Every package of food containing the following ingredients/additives shall bear the following declarations on the
label in a rectangular box, namely,-

1. For products containing 10% or more polyols, the declaration should include a statement indicating that polyols may have a laxative effect.

2. Products containing 10% or more polydextrose should declare that polydextrose may have a laxative effect.

3. Products containing Isomaltulose should declare "Contains Isomaltulose" and specify the energy content in kilocalories (kcal) per 100g or 100ml.

“5. 10 per cent. or more Sorbitol and Sorbitol syrup.
May have laxative effect, cause bloating and diarrhea
in children; and reduce calcium absorption in postmenopausal women.”;

(2) Every package containing the following articles of food shall bear the following declarations on the label in a
rectangular box, namely, -

1. Refined wheat flour (Maida) treated with improver or bleaching agents is labeled as "REFINED WHEAT FLOUR (MAIDA) TREATED WITH IMPROVER/BLEACHING AGENTS, TO BE USED BY BAKERIES ONLY."

2. Dried glucose syrup containing sulfur dioxide exceeding 40 ppm is labeled as "DRIED GLUCOSE SYRUP FOR USE IN SUGAR CONFECTIONERY ONLY."

3. Fruit squash containing additional sodium or potassium salt is labeled as "CONTAINS ADDITIONAL SODIUM/POTASSIUM SALT."

4. Flavour emulsion and flavour paste meant for use in carbonated or non-carbonated beverages is labeled as "FLAVOUR EMULSION AND FLAVOUR PASTE FOR USE IN CARBONATED OR NON-CARBONATED BEVERAGES ONLY."

5. Cheese(s) coated or packed in food-grade waxes should be labeled with "COATED WAX TO BE REMOVED BEFORE CONSUMPTION."

6. Frozen desserts or frozen confections made with edible vegetable oil and vegetable fat are labeled accordingly.

7. Common salt, based on its purpose, is labeled for "IODISATION/IRON FORTIFICATION/ANIMAL USE/PRESERVATION NOT MEANT FOR DIRECT CONSUMPTION/INFANT FOOD PRODUCTS/MEDICINE/INDUSTRIAL USE."

8. Fresh fruit coated with wax specifies the type of wax used, such as "COATED WITH WAX (give name of wax)."

9. Gelatin meant for human consumption is labeled as "GELATIN FOOD GRADE."

* Strike out whatever is not applicable.
(3) Every package containing the following articles of food and advertisement relating thereto shall carry the warning
and/or declaration, in a rectangular box, namely, -

1. Pan Masala is labeled with "CHEWING OF PAN MASALA IS INJURIOUS TO HEALTH."
Note: The warning statement must cover 50% of front-of-pack of
the label”;


2. Supari is labeled with "CHEWING OF SUPARI IS INJURIOUS TO HEALTH."

3. Table top sweeteners containing Aspartame (Methyl ester), Acesulfame Potassium, Sucralose, Saccharin Sodium, Neotame are labeled as follows:
   - (I) "CONTAINS........... (NAME OF ARTIFICIAL SWEETENER)"
   - (II) "NOT RECOMMENDED FOR CHILDREN"

4. Aspartame (Methyl ester) marketed as "Table Top Sweetener" is labeled with "NOT FOR PHENYLKETONURICS."

(4) Every package of food containing the following ingredients/additives and advertisement relating thereto shall carry
the following warning and declaration, in a rectangular box, namely,-
"1. Sweeteners mentioned under Appendix A of Food Safety and Standards (Food Products Standards and Food Additive) Regulations, 2011:
(i) This contains……………………….. (name of the sweetener).
(ii) *Not recommended for phenylketonurics; for children suffering from seizure disorders; pregnant and lactating mothers (if Aspartame is added).
(iii) *Not recommended for children; pregnant and lactating mothers” (if Acesulfame potassium is added).
(iv) *Not recommended for phenylketonurics; for children; pregnant and lactating mothers (if Aspartame-Acesulfame salt is added).
(v) *Not recommended for children (if SACCHARINS is added).

Mixture of Sweeteners mentioned under Appendix A of Food Safety and Standards (Food Products Standards and Food Additive) Regulation, 2011:
This ………........…… (name of food) contains an admixture of ......... (name of the sweeteners). Provided that in addition to the above declaration every package of food containing mixture of sweeteners shall declare the labelling requirement prescribed under these regulations for the individual sweeteners present in the mixture; Note: In case of food package having surface area up to 100 cm², the size of numerals & letters for such declarations shall not be less than 1.5 mm.

Every package of food which is permitted to contain non-caloric sweetener mentioned in Food Safety and Standards (Food Products Standards and Food Additive) Regulations, 2011:
CONTAINS NON-CALORIC SWEETENER."

4. Monosodium Glutamate in packages of food is labeled with:
   - "This package of (name of the food) ............... contains added MONOSODIUM GLUTAMATE."
   - "NOT RECOMMENDED FOR INFANTS BELOW 12 MONTHS AND PREGNANT WOMEN."

(5)Every container of refined vegetable oil shall bear the following label, namely,—
Refined (name of the Oil) Oil

(6) One time usable plastic bottles of packaged drinking water and mineral water shall carry the following declaration.

CRUSH THE BOTTLE AFTER USE
OR
DISPOSE THE BOTTLE RESPONSIBLY

(7) Every package of fat spread, milk products, milk based fruit drink, fermented milk products, soy and rice drink,
cheese products, yoghurt products, spice sauces, salad dressings, juices and nectars containing added plant stanol
esters shall bear the following label, namely: —

Contains Plant Stanol Esters (as Plant Stanols )---gm/100 gm or 100ml.
 Patients on cholesterol lowering medication should use the product under medicalsupervision.
 May not be nutritionally appropriate for pregnant and lactating women and childrenunder the age
of five years.
 CONSUMPTION OF MORE THAN 3g. PER DAY, TOTAL OF STEROL,STANOLS OR
COMBINATION THEREFOF SHALL BE AVOIDED.

(8) Every package of biscuits, bread, cakes, breakfast cereals, carbonated water, thermally processed fruits, fruit
juices, fruit nectars, fruit beverages, fruit squashes, jam, jelly, fruit cheese, marmalade, dairy based drinks, milk
powder, carbohydrate- based and milk product based sweets like gulabjamun, rosogolla, peda, khoya burfi, macroni
products, noodles, pasta, sweets and confectionery, candies and icings, savories and snacks wherever the trehalose is
added shall bear the following label, namely:—

Contains Trehalose

(9) Every package of flakes and ready to eat dry breakfast cereals, noodles, pasta, salad dressings or toppings and
spreads; table top fibre as filler or carrier, cereals and other snack food or savouries and bakery products including
biscuits, cookies, bread, cake mix and pastries and other products where dextrin is allowed under Food Safety and
standards (Food Products standards and Food Additive) Regulations, 2011, containing added Dietary Fibre (Dextrinsoluble fibre), shall bear the following declarations, namely:-

Contains Dietary Fibre (Dextrin) ----- (Source of soluble Dietary Fibre)

(1) Fat spread, milk products, milk based fruit drink, fermented milk products, soy and rice drinks, cheese
products, yoghurt products, spice sauces, salad dressings, juices and nectars, edible oils, and bakery products
containing added plant sterol shall contain the following declarations, namely: -

Contains Plant Sterol (as Phytosterols) ---g/100g or 100ml.
 Patients on cholesterol lowering medication should use the productunder medical
supervision
 May not be nutritionally appropriate for pregnant and lactating womenand children
under the age of five years.
 CONSUMPTION OF MORE THAN 3g/DAY,TOTAL OF STEROL,STANOLS,
OR COMBINATION THEREOF, SHOULD BE AVOIDED

(11)(a) The label of a food, which has been treated with ionizing radiation, shall carry a written statement indicating
the treatment in close proximity to the name of the food.
(b) Any food that has undergone the process of irradiation provided under regulation 2.13 of Food Safety and
Standards (Food Products Standards and Food Additives) Regulations, 2011, shall bear the Radura logo in
green colour and following declaration on the label, namely: -

PROCESSED BY RADIATION
Name of the Product:
Purpose of Radiation Processing:
Operating License No. :
Batch Identification No. (BIN) (as provided by facility):
Date of Processing..................…………”

2. Specific requirements/ restrictions on manner of labelling
2.1 Labelling of edible oils and fats
(1) The package, label or the advertisement of edible refined vegetable oils and fats shall not use any exaggerated
expressions like “Super-Refined”, “Extra-Refined”, “Micro-Refined”, “Double refined,”, Ultra-Refined”.
(2) Every package of vanaspati made from more than 30 percent of Rice bran oil shall bear the following label,
namely: -
 ‘This package of vanaspati is made from more than
 30 per cent Rice bran oil by weight”
(3) A package containing annatto colour in vegetable oils shall bear the following label namely:—

Contains Annatto colour

(4) Every package containing an admixture of edible oils shall carry the following label declaration
immediately below its brand name/trade name on front of pack, namely

Multi-Sourced Edible Vegetable Oils
(Name and nature* of edible vegetable oil) ……………………..% by weight
(Name and nature* of edible vegetable oil)………………………% by weight

(*i.e. in raw or refined form)
The font size of the label declaration “Multi-Sourced Edible Vegetable Oils” shall not be less than 5 mm and
for label declaration “Name and nature of edible vegetable oil…..% by weight”, font size shall not be less
than 3mm:
Provided that the font size of the label declaration shall not be less than 10mm in case the net quantity of the
edible oil contained in the packages is 5 litre and above.
There shall also be the following declaration in bold capital letters along with the name of product on
front/central panel,-

NOT TO BE SOLD LOOSE

2.2 Coffee-Chicory Mixture
(1) Every package containing a mixture of coffee and chicory shall have affixed to it a label upon which shall be
printed the following declaration:
Coffee blended with Chicory
This mixture contains
Coffee…………………………… Percent
Chicory………………………….. Percent
(2) Every package containing Instant Coffee-Chicory mixture shall have affixed to it a label upon which shall be
printed the following declarations:
Instant Coffee-Chicory mixture made from blends of coffee and chicory
Coffee…………………………… Percent
Chicory………………………….. Percent
2.3 Labelling of Milk and Milk products
All Milk powders, skimmed milk powders and condensed milk (sweetened and flavoured) or similar products,
which can be reconstituted into liquid milk, shall carry the following declaration on label:
NOT TO BE USEDFOR INFANTS BELOW SIX MONTHS
2.4 Labelling prohibitions for drinking water (both packaged and mineral)
(1) No claims concerning medicinal (preventative, alleviative or curative) effects shall be made in respect of the
properties of the product covered by the standard. Claims of other beneficial effects related to the health of
the consumer shall not be made.

(2) The name of the locality, hamlet or specified place may not form part of the trade name unless it refers to
packaged water collected at the place designated by that trade name.
(3) The use of any statement or of any pictorial device which may create confusion in the mind of the public or
in any way mislead the public about the nature, origin, composition, and properties of such waters put on sale
is prohibited.
2.5 Labelling of ‘Gluten Free’ products
(1) The term "Gluten Free" shall be printed in the immediate proximity of the name of the product in the case of
products described in regulation 2.14 of the Food Safety and Standards (Food Products Standards and Food
Additives) Regulations, 2011, namely:-
“Gluten Free”

In case any gluten free product is manufactured in a plant where gluten containing products are also
manufactured this shall be declared on the label as “Processed in a plant where gluten containing products are
manufactured” 


“2.6 Labelling of various types of bread

1. Whole Wheat Bread: Whole wheat flour (Atta) should be at least 75% of the flour.
2. Wheat Bread or Brown Bread: Whole wheat flour (Atta) should be at least 50% of the flour.
3. White Bread: Refined wheat flour (Maida).
4. Multigrain Bread: Food grains permitted under FSS (Food Product Standards & Food Additives) Regulations, 2011; minimum 20% should be grains other than wheat*.
5. Specialty Bread: Specialty ingredient that must be present in case a prefix is added to the term “bread” on the label.
   a) Milk Bread: Milk solids should be 6%.
   b) Honey Bread: Honey should be 5%.
   c) Cheese Bread: Cheese should be 10%.
   d) Oatmeal Bread: Oats should be 15%.
   e) Cracked Wheat/Dhalia Bread: Cracked wheat/Dhalia should be 15%.
   f) Bread with Wheat Germ: Wheat germ should be 2%.
   g) Egg Bread: Edible whole egg solids should be 1.5%.
   h) Fruit Bread or Loaf: Candied fruit should be 10%.
   i) Triticale Bread: Triticale flour should be 20%.
   j) Rye Bread: Rye flour should be 20%.
   k) Raisin Bread: Raisins should be 10%.
   l) Bran Bread: Edible bran should be 5%.
   m) Protein Enriched Bread (Protein Prachur Bread): Edible protein should be 15%.
   n) Bread such as Garlic Bread, Masala Bread, Oregano Bread, etc.: Garlic, oregano, etc. should be 2%.
   o) Bread with Seeds such as Flax Seeds, Sesame Seeds, Pumpkin Seeds, etc.: Flax seeds, sesame seeds, pumpkin seeds, etc. should be 5%.
