Vegan:
(1) No person shall manufacture, pack, sell, offer for sale, market or otherwise distribute
or import any food as vegan food unless they comply with the requirements laid down under these regulations.
(2) The food products to be called vegan, shall not have involved animal testing for any purpose including
safety evaluation, unless provided by any Regulatory Authority.
(3) Every packaging material used for vegan foods shall comply with the provisions of the packaging
regulations.
(4) The Food Business Operator shall ensure that all stages of production, processing and distribution shall be
designed to take the appropriate precautions in conformity with the Good Manufacturing Practices in such a way to
avoid the unintended presence of non-vegan substances.
(5) If the same production line is shared with non-vegan products or ingredients, thorough cleaning or
comparable measures in conformity with Good Manufacturing Practices shall be carried out before production of
vegan products commences and the same shall extend to all associated machinery, equipment, utensils and surfaces.
(6) The Food Business Operator shall take appropriate precautions in conformity with the Good
Manufacturing Practices before vegan products are prepared, produced or packaged.
(7) There shall be traceability established up to the manufacturer level and the Food Business Operator shall
comply with any other requirements specified by the Food Authority to maintain the vegan integrity of the foods or
food ingredients or products thereof from time to time.
(8) Every vegan food or ingredient shall comply with the relevant provisions, as applicable under the Act,
rules and regulations.

(1)Labelling and display requirements. - (i) The seller of vegan food either exclusively or as part of retail
merchandise shall store and display such food in a manner distinguishable from non-vegan food.
(ii) In addition to the specified requirements, all vegan foods shall comply with the packaging and labelling
requirements specified under the Food Safety and Standards (Labelling and Display) Regulations, 2020, except clause
(b) of sub regulation (4) of regulation 5.

(2) Vegan food compliance. - (i) The Food Business Operator shall submit an application to the concerned licensing
authority with all necessary details in a format as may be specified by the Food Authority.
(ii) The Food Authority may specify guidelines for approval of vegan logo.
(iii) No vegan food products shall be imported except with a certificate issued by the recognised authorities of
the exporting countries in the format as specified by the Authority is accepted.


"Vegan food compliance. (1) The Food Business Operator shall submit an application to the concerned licensing authority with all necessary details in a format as may be specified by the Food Authority.
(2) The Food Authority may specify guidelines for approval of vegan logo.
(3) No vegan food products shall be imported except with a certificate issued by the recognized authorities of the exporting countries in the format as specified by the Authority is accepted." (sic)
3. In reference to the above, following revised guidelines are hereby provided for the purpose of applying for endorsement of vegan logo-
a) Annexure-A: Guidelines for submission of applications for endorsement of vegan logo;
b) Annexure-B: Application for endorsement under FSS (Vegan Foods) Regulations, 2022 (Form- A);
c) Annexure-C: Approval/ Rejection for endorsement of vegan logo (Form-B).
d) Annexure D: Proforma for self-declaration