3. General requirements.- (1) The articles of food sold in capsule format, hard or soft or vegetarian, shall comply with
the general monograph and quality requirements specified for them in Indian Pharmacopoeia:
Provided that the food business operator may use the approved colours and additives permitted in Schedule VF;
Provided further that the food business operator may use the natural flavors or nature identical flavours or
synthetic flavors in accoradance with the provisions of regulation 3.3.1 of Food Safety and Standards (Food
Product Standards and Food Additives) Regulations, 2011.
(2) For the purposes of sub-regulation (1) the food business operator may declare the addition of flavour on labels
of such products in accoradance with the provisions of Food Safety and Standards (Labelling and Packaging)
Regulations, 2011.
(3) The tablets, capsules and syrups shall fulfil the general quality requirements and standards as specified in
Indian Pharmacopoeia, British Pharmacopoeia or United States Pharmacopoeia.
(4) The quantity of nutrients added to the articles of food shall not exceed the recommended daily allowance as
specified by the Indian Council of Medical Research and in case such standards are not specified, the standards
laid down by international food standards body, namely, Codex Alimentarius Commission, shall apply. 
(5) In case of food products falling under health supplement categories, the individual nutrient content shall not be
less than fifteen per cent of the recommended daily allowance where a nutrient content claim is being made:
Provided that, if claim of higher nutrient content is made, the nutrient content shall not be less than thirty per
cent of the recommended daily allowance.
(6) For the articles of food specified in these regulations, the Food Authority may permit the food business operator
to add food colours subject to the level restrictions as mentioned in Food Safety and Standards (Food Product
Standards and Food Additives) Regulations, 2011.
(7) The articles of food with standard nutrient or nutritionally complete formulation shall consist of a composition
delivering the desired level of energy, protein, vitamins and minerals, and other essential nutrients required for
respective age group, gender and physiological stage in accordance with the guidelines made by the Indian
Council of Medical Research.
(8) The purity criteria for the ingredients used in the categories of articles of food covered under these regulations
shall be as determined and notified in the official gazette by the Food Authority from time to time.
(9) In case such standards are not specified, the purity criteria generally accepted by pharmacopoeias, namely, Indian
Pharmacopoeia, Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India, relevant Bureau of Indian Standards Specifications, Quality
Standards of Indian Medicinal Plants, Indian Council of Medical Reseach, British Pharmacopoeia, United States
Pharmacopoeia, Food Chemical Codex, Joint Food and Agriculture Organization or World Health Organisation
Expert Committee on Food Additives or CODEX Alimentarius may be adopted by food Business operators.
(10) The food business operator shall intimate the purity criteria adopted for ingredients to the Food Authority
including any change when adopted.
(11) The tolerance limit for variation in case of articles of food covered in these regulations during analysis of
samples of finished products, shall not be more than (-) ten per cent from the declared value of the nutrients or
nutritional ingredients on the label .
(12) The manufacturing of ingredients and products covered under these regulations shall be carried out in
compliance with the established good manufacturing practices.
(13) For purposes of these regulations, any of the ingredients specified in Schedule I, Schedule II, Schedule III,
Schedule IV, Schedule VI, Schedule VII, and Schedule VIII may be used in food in accordance with the
provisions of these regulations, and for the said purpose, may use additives as applicable to categories specified
in Schedule VA to Schedule VF.
Explanation 1.- For the purposes of these regulations food or ingredients referred to in Food Safety and Standards
Regulations, 2011, and for which standards are provided, and the plants and botanicals specified in Schedule IV of
these regulations offered in normal or naturally occurring forms shall not constitute a health supplement or
nutraceutical, or food for special dietary use or food for special medical purpose.
Explanation 2.- Mere food forms such as vegetables, namely, bhindi, karela and other vegetables; cereals, namely,
ragi, jowar, millets and other cereals; legumes, namely, rajmah and other legumes; spices, namely, pepper, jeera,
turmeric and other spices; fruits, namely, amla, jamun, grapes and other fruits; and other plants or botanicals,
minimally processed (cleaned, de-weeded, sorted, dried or powdered), in either as juice or cooked form, shall not
constitute ‘health supplement’ or ‘nutraceutical’ or ‘food for special dietary use’ or ‘food for special medical
purpose’.
(14) The formulation of articles of food shall be based on the principles of sound medicine or nutrition and supported
by validated scientific data, wherever required.
(15) No hormones or steroids or psychotropic ingredients shall be added in any of the articles of food specified in
these regulations.
(16) The label on articles of food shall specify the purpose, the target consumer group and the physiological or
disease conditions which they address, recommended duration of use, and the specific labelling requirements as
mentioned against each type of article of food.
(17) The label, accompanying leaflet or other labelling and advertisement of each type of article of food, referred to
in these regulations shall provide sufficient information on the nature and purpose of the article of food and detailed
instructions and precautions for its use, and the format of information given shall be appropriate for the intended
consumer.
(18) An article of food which has not been particularly modified in any way but is suitable for use in a particular
dietary regimen because of its natural composition, shall not be designated as ‘health supplement’ or ‘special
dietary’ or ‘special dietetic’ or by any other equivalent term, and such food may bear a statement on the label that
‘this food is by its nature X’ (‘X’ refers to the essential distinguishing characteristic as demonstrated by the
generally accepted scientific data), provided that the statement does not mislead the consumer.
(19) The Food Authority may suspend or restrict sale of such articles of food as have been placed in the market that
are not clearly distinguishable from articles of food for normal consumption and are not suitable for their claimed
nutritional purpose, or may endanger human health, in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
(20) The Food Authority may, at any time, direct a food business operator manufacturing and selling such special
type of article of food, to furnish details regarding the history of use of the novel or modified ingredients added and
their safety evaluation.
(21) The mere combination of vitamins and minerals formulated in tablets, capsules, syrup formats shall not be
covered in any of the categories of these regulations except when vitamins and minerals are added to an article of
food or in a food format.
(22) The labelling on the article of food shall be in accoradance with the Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and
Labelling) Regulations, 2011, and the specific labelling requirements provided in these regulations.
(23) The articles of food shall conform to the Food Safety and Standards (Contaminants, Toxins and Residues)
Regulations, 2011.
(24) No person shall manufacture, pack, sell, offer for sale, market or otherwise distribute or import any food
products referred to in these regulations unless they comply with the requirements laid down in these regulations.
(25) Whoever contravenes the provisions of these regulations shall be liable for punishment provided under Chapter
IX of the Act.
 4. Claims. – (1) Every food business operator may make nutritional or health claims in respect of an article of
food.
(2) For the purposes of sub – regulation (1), a nutritional claim shall consist of the ‘Ingredients (nutrient or
nutritional) content’ of an article of food which shall be subject to the nutritional supplement requirements
specified in Schedule I, Schedule II, Schedule III, Schedule IV, and Schedule VI.
(3) For the purposes of these regulations, health claim means any representation in respect of an article of food that
states, suggests or implies that a relationship exists between the constituent of that nutrient or nutritional, health,
and specific disease conditions.
(4) The health claim in respect of an article of food consists of the following two essential components, namely:-
(i) nutrient or nutritional ingredients; and
(ii) health related benefits.
(5) The health claim in respect of an article of food may include the following types, but not limited to
(i) ingredients (nutrient or nutritional) function claims;
(ii) enhanced function claims;
(iii) disease risk reduction claims;
(iv) health maintenance claims;
(v) immunity claims – increased resistance (excluding vaccines); and
(vi) anti-ageing claims.
(6) The other claims in an article of food that are not drug claims may be allowed subject to prior approval of the Food
Authority.
(7) The health claims in respect of an article of food shall be commensurate with the adequate level of documentation and
valid proof made available for review by the Food Authority when called for.
(8) To claim ingredients, nutrient or nutritional, in respect of an article of food for enhanced function and disease risk
reduction, regard shall be had to-
(i) claims that led to ingredients (nutrient or nutritional);
(ii) available scientific literature including official traditional texts and post market data or consumer
studies or cohort or retroactive studies based on eating pattern and health benefits, epidemiological
international and national data, and other well documented data;
(iii) consensual, congruent and concurrent validity studies;
(iv) health promotive and disease risk reduction based on proof from literature and human data of efficacy
and safety of the nutrient;
(v) not only controlled clinical trials for efficacy and safety data; but also nutraepidemiological data;
(vi) qualified structure function claims for specific organ or function which are comprehensible to
consumer;
(vii) prohibition of implied claims for curing disease or claims of drug like efficacy such as ‘Prevents bone
fragility in post menopausal women’;
(viii) prohibition of implied cure for disease claims by the name of the product such as cancer cure or
througha pictures, vignettes or symbols, namely, electrocardiogram tracing, lipid profile; and
(ix) for structure-function claims, a case-to-case basis consumer information for specific age or gender or
vulnerable population.
(9) (i) For the product led claims in respect of an article of food based on human studies with evidence based data,
regard shall be had to-
(a) valid data and suitable statistical design proving the benefit for disease risk reduction, that is,
human intervention studies;
(b) ingredient, that is, nutrient or nutritional;
(c) the product compatibility for the proposed claim benefit and suitable qualifiers such as heart
healthy claim on polyunsaturated fatty acids;
(d) the use of word “shown” as depicted in the example below when a single human intervention study
shows significant benefit:
“Product <Name of the Product> is ‘shown’ to be helping in <keeping your heart healthy>
or <heart healthy>:
(e) the use of word “Proven" as depicted in the example below when more than one human
intervention studies or epidemiological evidence on Indian population have been provided with
concurrent validity:
“Product <Name of the Product> is ‘proven’ <to make you lose weight>:
(ii) For health claims where scientific support does not exist, or if a novel ingredient is to be introduced, there
shall be a prior approval of the Authoity which shall be based on adequate scientific evidence.
(iii) If the health claims are product led, the food business operator shall notify to the Food Authority before
putting the same in the market, by submitting relevant documents along with a copy of the label.
5. General principles for query or challenge.-The food business operator shall-
(i) prepare and make available the comprehensive product information, safety and claims support data and
shall periodically get it reviewed and scrutinised by a scientist or expert with relevant qualifications and
experience;
(ii) attach the scientific view of the reviewer on claims and its veracity along with the qualification and
experience of the reviewer as an essential part of the document;
(iii) clarify, in case of a technical query from the Food Authority or on a public complaint lodged with the
Food Authority, and assist the Food Authority to examine or authorise an appropriate expert group to
review the case; and
(iv) alter or modify or stop claim when directed by the Food Authority which shall be based on the opinion of
an expert group.
6. Health supplements.- (1) (i) Health supplements may be used to supplement the normal diet of a person above
the age of five years.
(ii) the health supplements shall contain concentrated source of one or more nutrients, namely, amino acids,
enzymes, minerals, proteins, vitamins, other dietary substances, plants or botanicals, prebiotics, probiotics and
substances from animal origin or other similar substances with known and established nutritional or beneficial
physiological effect, which are presented as such and are offered alone or in combination, but are not drugs as
defined in the clause (b) of section 3 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940) and the rules made
thereunder.
(iii) the health supplements shall be marketed in single use packaging as appropriate to maintain integrity and
quality of the product, or in dosage forms namely, capsules, tablets, pills, sachets; jelly or gel, semi-solids and
other similar forms or any other forms of liquids and powders designed to be taken in measured unit quantities.
(iv) the health supplements shall not include any of the food products or categories of articles of food for which
specific standards have been laid down in any other parts of these regulations. 
(2) (i) The health supplements shall contain any of the ingredients specified in Schedule I or Schedule II or
Schedule IV or Schedule VII or Schedule VIII or enzymes only of Schedule VI.
(ii) The ingredients specified in the Schedules referred to in clause (i) of sub-regulation (2) may be used in
manufacturing of health supplements without prejudice to modifications for one or more of these nutrients
rendered necessary by the intended use of the product.
(iii) The quantity of nutrients added to the articles of food shall not exceed the recommended daily allowance as
specified by the Indian Council of Medical Research and in case such standards are not specified, standards laid
down by the international food standards body, namely, Codex Alimentarius Commission shall apply.
(iv) The food business operator shall apply to the Food Authority for inclusion of any new nutrient or other
substance with a nutritional or physiological function, which has no history of use in India or that without
evidence, establishing that the nutrient may result in certain nutritional and physiological benefits with
justification for approval.
(v) The Food Authority may, after proper scientific evaluation, specify the nutrients approved by it from time to
time.
(3) (i) The labelling, presentation and advertisement shall not claim that the health supplement has the property of
preventing, treating or curing a human disease, or refer to such properties;
(ii) The statement by the food business operator relating to the structure or function or the general well being of the
body may be allowed by the Food Authority if the statement is supported by the generally accepted scientific
data;
(iii) Every package of health supplement shall carry the following information on the label, namely.-
(a) the words “HEALTH SUPPLEMENT”;
(b) the common name of the health supplement, or a description sufficient to indicate the true nature of the
health supplement including the common names of the categories of nutrients or substances that
characterise the product;
(c) a declaration as to the amount of the nutrients or substances with a nutritional or physiological effect
present in the product;
(d) an advisory warning ‘NOT FOR MEDICINAL USE’ prominently written;
(e) the quantity of nutrients, where applicable expressed in terms of percentage of the relevant recommended
daily allowances as specified by the Indian Council of Medical Research and bear a warning, “Not to
exceed the recommended daily usage”;
(f) a statement that the health supplement is not be used as a substitute for a varied diet;
(g) a warning or any other precautions to be taken while consuming, known side effects, if any,
contraindications, and published product or drug interactions, as applicable; and
(h) a statement that the product is required to be stored out of reach of children.
(4) No food business operator shall use additives for health supplement formulation except those specified in
Schedule VA or Schedule VE or Schedule VF.
7. Nutraceuticals.– (1)(i) The nutraceuticals shall provide a physiological benefit and help maintain good health.
(ii) A food business operator may extract, isolate and purify nutraceuticals from food or non-food sources, that is
preparing amino acids and their derivatives by bacterial fermentation under controlled conditions.
(iii) A food business operator may prepare and sell the nutraceuticals in the food-format of granules, powder, tablet,
capsule, liquid, jelly or gel, semi-solids and other formats and may be packed in sachet, ampoule, bottle, and in
any other format as measured unit quantities except those formats that are meant for parenteral administration.
(2) (i) The nutraceuticals shall contain any of the ingredients specified in Schedule I or Schedule II or Schedule
IV or Schedule VI or Schedule VII or Schedule VIII.
(ii) A food business operator may use ingredients specified in the Schedules referred to in clause (i) of subregulation (2) in manufacturing an article of food containing nutraceuticals without prejudice to modifications
for one or more of these nutrients rendered necessary by the intended use of the product;
(iii) The quantity of nutrients added where applicable, shall not exceed the recommended daily allowance as
specified by the Indian Council of Medical Research and in case such standards are not specified, the standard
laid down by international food standards body, namely Codex Alimentarius Commission shall apply;
(iv) A nutraceutical which is not provided in these regulations but its safety has been established in India or in any
other country, shall be manufactured or sold in India only on prior approval of the Food Authority;
(v) For the purposes of clause (iv), a food business operator shall apply to the Food Authority for approval which
shall be accompanied by documented history of usage of at least fifteen years in India, or thirty years in the
country of origin;
(vi) The Food Authority may from time to time specify the nutraceuticals as approved by it after undertaking proper
scientific evaluation.
(3) (i) No ingredient other than those specified in Schedule VI shall be used as nutraceutical with standardisation to
marker compounds specified and at daily usage levels specified therein;
 (ii) The ingredient for which the standardisation of the marker coumpound has not been specified shall comply with
manufacturer specifications or quality requirements and purity criteria as specified in regulation 3;
 (iii) For the ingredient for which the daily minimum and maximum usage levels have not been specified, the food
business operator shall adopt the usage level based on relevant scientific data and retain the documentary
evidence of such data;
 (iv) For the purpose of clause (iii), the food business operator shall submit the documented scientific data to the
Food Authority as and when called for;
 (v) No food business operator shall use the extract of ingredient as nutraceutical other than that specified in
Schedule IV;
Provided that the ingredient of plant or botanical origin specified in Schedule IV and Schedule VI may be used
either in the given form, or their extract, subject to the extractive ratios in relation to the daily usage value.
(4) (i) The labelling, presentation and advertisement shall not claim that the nutraceutical has the property of preventing,
treating or curing a human disease, or refer to such properties;
 (ii) The statement by the food business operator relating to the structure or function or the general well-being of the
body may be allowed by the Food Authority, if the statement is supported by the generally accepted scientific
data;
 (iii) Every package of food containing nutraceutical shall carry the following information on the label, namely:-
(a) the word “NUTRACEUTICAL”;
(b) the common name of the nutraceutical;
(c) a declaration as to the amount of each nutraceutical ingredient in the product that either has a nutritional
or physiological effect;
(d) where it is appropriate, the quantity of nutrient shall be expressed in terms of percentage of the relevant
recommended daily allowances as specified by the Indian Council of Medical Research even when the
nutrient is present along with a nutraceutical as an adjunct and shall bear an advisory warning ‘not to
exceed the stated recommended daily usage’;
(e) an advisory warning for ‘recommended usage’ ;
(f) an advisory warning ‘NOT FOR MEDICINAL USE’ prominently written;
(g) an advisory warning in cases where a danger may exist with excess consumption;
(h) an advisory warning or any other precautions to be taken while consuming, known side effects, if any,
contraindications, and product-drug interactions, as applicable;
(i) a statement that the product is required to be stored out of reach of children;
(5) No food business operator shall use additives for nutraceutical formulation except those specified in Schedule
VA or Schedule VE or Schedule VF.
8. Food for special dietary use, other than infants, and those products intended to be taken under medical
advice. – (1) No food business operator shall manufacture, formulate or process an article of food for special
dietary use unless-
(i) specially processed or formulated to satisfy particular dietary requirements which may exist or arise because of
certain physiological or specific health conditions, namely:-
(a) low weight, obesity, diabetes, high blood pressure;
(b) pregnant and lactating women; and
(c) geriatric population and celiac disease and other health conditions.
(ii) The food business operator shall clearly indicate on the label whether or not the food for special dietary use is to
be taken under medical advice;
(iii) A food business operator may manufacture or sell an article of food for special dietary use in single use
packaging or in dosage form, namely, granules, capsules, tablets, pills, jelly, semi-solid and other similar forms,
sachets of powder, or any other similar forms of liquids and powders designed to be taken in measured unit
quantities with a nutritional or physiological effect;
(iv) A food business operator may formulate an article of food for special dietary use in formats meant for oral
feeding througha enteral tubes but shall not be used for parenteral use;
(v) An article of food for special dietary use shall not include the normal food which is merely enriched or modified
with nutrients and meant for mass consumption, intended for improvement of general health for day to day use
and do not claim to be targeted to consumers with specific disease conditions and also not include the article of
food intended to replace complete diet covered under food for special medical purpose specified in regulation 9.
(2) (i) The articles of food for special dietary use shall contain any of the ingredients specified in Schedules I or
Schedule II or Schedule III or Schedule IV or Schedule VI or Schedule VII or Schedule VIII.
(ii) A food business operator may use the ingredients specified in the Schedules referred to in clause (i) of subregulation (2) in manufacturing food for special dietary use without prejudice to modifications for one or more
of these nutrients rendered necessary by the intended use of the product.
(iii) For any new nutrient, which has no history of use in India or that without a proof establishing that the nutrient
may result in certain nutritional and physiological benefits, the food business operator shall apply to the Food
Authority with justification for approval, and the Food Authority may, from time to time specify the nutrients
approved by it after proper scientific evaluation.
(iv) A food business operator may add the quantity of the nutrients at a level higher than the recommended daily
allowance, but not exceeding the limits of vitamins and minerals specified in Schedule III.
(v) (i) The articles of food used as a formula food presented as a replacement for all meals of the daily diet for
slimming, weight management and weight control purposes shall comply with the following, namely:-
(a) provide energy not less than 800 kcal (3,350 kJ) and not more than 1,200 kcal (5,020 kJ);
(b) the individual portions or servings contained in the formula food shall provide approximately onethird or one-fourth of the total energy of the food in the pack depending on whether the recommended
number of portions or servings per day is three or four, as the case may be, respectively.
(ii) A formula food presented as a replacement for one or more meals of the daily diet shall comply with the
following, namely:-
(a) provide energy not less than 200 kcal (835 kJ) and not more than 400 kcal (1,670 kJ) per meal;
(b) when such products are presented as a replacement for the major part of the diet, the total energy intake shall
not exceed 1,200 kcal (5,020 kJ).
(iii) Not less than twenty five per cent and not more than fifty per cent of the energy available from the food, when
ready-to-serve, shall be derived from its protein content and the total amount of protein shall not exceed 125 g per
day.
(iv) The quality of protein shall have-
(a) the protein digestibility corrected amino acid score of 1.0 known as,the reference protein;
(b) the protein digestibility corrected amino acid score where less than 1.0, the minimum level shall be
increased to compensate for the lower protein quality;
(c) the protein with a protein digestibility corrected amino acid score of 0.8 or more shall be used in a formula
food for use in a weight control diet; and
(v) For improving the protein quality, the food business operator shall add only L- forms of essential amino acids
except for methionine where DL form is allowed.
(vi) Not more than thirty per cent of the energy available from fat and not less than three per cent of the energy
from linoleic acid in the form of a glyceride.
(vii) A formula food represented as a replacement for all meals per day, shall not have less than a hundred per cent
of the reccommended daily allowance of vitamins and minerals in the daily intake.
(viii) The formula food for special dietary use shall have adequate dietary fiber.
(3) (i) No statement or claim shall be made on the label implying prevention, cure or treatment of any specific disease
or its diagnosis or otherwise preventing or interfering with the normal operation of a physiological function,
whether permanently or temporarily, unless otherwise approved by the Food Authority;
(ii) The statement by the food business operator relating to the structure or function or the general well-being of the
body may be allowed by the Food Authority, if the statement is supported by the generally accepted scientific
data;
(iii) Every package containing food for special dietary use shall carry the following information on the label,
namely:- 
(a) the words “FOOD FOR SPECIAL DIETARY USE” followed by “Food for……...” (mentioning the
particular physiological or health condition)”;
(b) a statement “For weight control and management" in close proximity to the name of the articles of food
specially prepared for weight management and control;
(c) a statement that the product is not to be used by pregnant, nursing and lactating women or by infants,
children, adolescents and elderly, except when medically advised;
(d) a statement on the target consumer group, rationale for use of the product and a description of the
properties or characteristics that make it useful;
(e) if the product has been formulated for a specific age group, a prominent statement to that effect;
(f) a statement specifying the nutrient which is reduced, deleted, increased or otherwise modified, relating
to normal requirement, and the rationale for the reduction, deletion, increase or other modification;
(g) an advisory warning ‘NOT FOR MEDICINAL USE’ prominently written;
(h) a warning in cases where a danger may exist with excess consumption;
(i) a warning that the product is not for parenteral use;
(j) a warning or any other precautions to be taken while consuming, known side effects, if any,
contraindications, and product-drug interactions, as applicable;
(k) the quantity of nutrients expressed in terms of percentage of the recommended daily allowance where it
is appropriate;
(l) information on osmolality or osmolarity or on acid-base balance where appropriate; and
(m) a statement that the product shall be stored out of reach of children.
(4) No food business operator shall use additives for food for special dietary uses, except those specified in
Schedule VB or Schedule VE or Schedule VF.
9. Food for special medical purpose.- (1) (i) Food for special medical purpose shall include food specially
prepared for weight reduction and intended as total replacement of normal diet.
(ii) A food business operator may formulate food for special medical purpose in format meant for oral feeding
througha enteral tubes.
(iii) The articles of food for special medical purpose shall not be used for parenteral use.
(iv) The articles of food for special medical purpose, other than those intended for infants, may either be
nutritionally complete food which, when used in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, shall
constitute the sole source of nourishment for the persons for whom they are intended or nutritionally incomplete
food with formulation specific for a disease, disorder or medical condition, but are not suitable to be used as the
sole source of nourishment.
(v) For the purposes of these regulations, the food for special medical purpose may be classified in to following
three categories, namely:-
(a) ‘nutritionally complete food with a standard nutrient formulation’, which when used in accordance with
the manufacturer's instructions, may constitute the sole source of nourishment for the persons for whom
they are intended;
(b) ‘nutritionally complete food with a nutrient-adopted formulation specific for a disease, disorder or
medical condition’, which when used in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, may constitute
the sole source of nourishment for the persons for whom they are intended; and
(c) ‘nutritionally incomplete food with a standard formulation or a nutrient-adopted formulation specific for
a disease, disorder or medical condition’, which is not suitable to be used as the sole source of
nourishment.
Note.- the food specified in sub-clauses (b) and (c) of clause (v) may be used as a partial replacement or as a
supplement to the person’s diet.
(2) (i) Food for special medical purpose shall contain any of the ingredients specified in Schedule I or Schedule II
or Schedule III or Schedule IV or Schedule VII or Schedule VIII or enzymes only of Schedule VI .
(ii) A food business operator shall use only the ingredients specified in the Schedules referred to in clause (i) of subregulation (2) in manufacturing food for special medical purpose without prejudice to modifications for one or
more of these nutrients rendered necessary by the intended use of the product.
(iii) A food business operator may apply to the Food Authority for any new nutrient, which has no history of use in
India or those without proof establishing that the nutrient may result in certain nutritional and physiological
benefits with justification for approval and the Food Authority may from time to time specify the nutrients
approved by it after proper scientific evaluation. 
(iv) The articles of food specially prepared for weight reduction and intended as total replacement of complete diet
shall, apart from complying with Schedule III, shall also ensure the following, namely:-
(a) that a formula food for very low energy diet is prepared according to instructions, with a daily energy
intake of 450-800 kcal as the only source of energy;
(b) that not less than 50 g protein with a protein digestibility corrected amino acid score of 1 is present in the
recommended daily intake of energy, and essential amino acids may be added to improve protein quality
only in amounts necessary for this purpose;
(c) for the purposes of clause (b) the food business operator shall add only L- forms of essential amino acids
except for methionine where DL form is allowed.
(d) very low energy diet provides not less than-
(I) 3 g of linoleic acid; and
(II) 0.5 g α-linolenic acid in the recommended daily intake with the α-linoleic acid and linolenic acid
ratio between 1:5 and 1:15;
(e) very low energy diet provides not less than 50 g of available carbohydrates in the recommended daily
intake of energy;
(f) that the formula food for special medical purpose have adequate dietary fiber.
(v) In food for special medical purpose, nutrients may be added at levels higher than the recommended daily
allowance, but not exceeding the limits of vitamins and minerals as specified in Schedule III.
(3) Every package of food for special medical purpose shall carry the following information on the label, namely:-
(a) the words ‘FOOD FOR SPECIAL MEDICAL PURPOSE’ printed in the immediate proximity of the
name or brand name of the product;
(b) an advisory warning “RECOMMENDED TO BE USED UNDER MEDICAL ADVICE ONLY”
appearing on the label in bold letters in an area separated from other written, printed or graphic
information;
(c) the statement “For the dietary management of ________” (with the blank to be filled in with the specific
disease, disorderor medical conditionfor which the product is intended, and for which it has been shown
to be effective) supported by appropriate scientific, and clinical or epidemiological data, and subject to
its approval by the Food Authority;
(d) a statement ‘NUTRITIONALLY COMPLETE’ if the food is intended to be used as a nutritionally
complete food;
(e) a statement on the rationale for use of the product by the target consumer group and a description of the
properties or characteristics that make it useful;
(f) a statement if the product has been formulated for a specific age group;
(g) a statement specifying the nutrient which have been reduced, deleted, increased or otherwise modified,
relatiing to normal requirements, and the rationale for the reduction, deletion, increase or other
modification;
(h) the quantity of nutrients expressed in terms of percentages of the recommended daily allowances, where
it is appropriate;
(i) information on osmolality or osmolarity, Renal Solute Load, Potential Renal Solute Load or acid-base
balance, wherever applicable;
(j) instructions for appropriate preparation, feeding, use and storage of the product after the opening of the
container;
(k) a warning that the product is not for parenteral use; and
(l) a statement that the product required to be stored out of reach of children.
(4) No food business operator shall use additives for food for special medical purpose except those specified in
Schedule VC or Schedule VD or Schedule VE or Schedule VF.
(5) No food business operator shall advertise the food for special medical purpose for use by general public.
10. Food with added probiotic ingredients. – (1) (i) No food business operator shall use probiotic ingredients in
food except the probiotic culture of the microorganisms specified in Schedule VII or those probiotic
microorganisms approved by the Food Authority from time to time. Probiotic preparations may contain added
prebiotics permitted under these regulations.
(ii) The viable number of organisms in food with added probiotic ingredients shall be ≥108
 CFU/g:
Provided that a lower viable number may be specified with proven studies on health benefits with those numbers
subject to the prior approval of the Food Authority.
(iii) The Food Authority may, from time to time, specify the probiotic microorganisms approved by it after proper
scientific evaluation:
Provided that the presence of the commonly used starter cultures of lactic acid producing bacteria such as
Lactococcus spp., earlier known as Streptococcus spp., Lactobacillus spp. and other such microorganisms used in
the preparation of fermented milk (dahi) and related products shall not be considered as probiotics, if the probiotic
properties have not been substantiated.
Note.- The guidelines issued by the Indain Council of Medical Research and Department of Biotechnology with respect
to probiotics provide additional information on their use.
(2) (i) The labelling, presentation and advertisement shall not claim that the probiotic food has the property of
preventing, treating or curing a human disease, or refer to such properties.
(ii) The statement by the food business operator relating to structure or function or the general well-being of the
body may be allowed by the Food Authority, if the statement is supported by the generally accepted scientific
data.
 (iii) Every package of probiotic food shall carry the following information on the label, namely:-
(a) the words “PROBIOTIC FOOD”;
(b) genus and species including strain designation or culture collection number, where applicable, in
brackets where probiotics are mentioned in the list of ingredients;
(c) viable numbers at the end of the shelf-life of probiotic strain corresponding to the level at which the
efficacy is claimed;
(d) the recommended serving size which shall deliver the effective viable dose of probiotics related to
health claims and recommended duration of use, proper storage temperature conditions, and time limit
for ‘Best Use’ after opening the container;
(e) an advisory warning ‘NOT FOR MEDICINAL USE’ prominently written; and
(f) a warning or any other precaution to be taken while consuming, known side effects, if any,
contraindications, and product-drug interactions, as applicable.
(3) No food business operator shall use additives in probiotic preparations except those specified in Schedule VA to
Schedule VF.
11. Food with added prebiotic ingredients.– (1) (i) No food business operator shall use prebiotics in
manufacturing food containing prebiotics except those specified in Schedule VIII or those prebiotics approved by the
Food Authority from time to time.
(ii) The prebiotic component, not an organism, to which the claim of being made, shall be characterised for a given
product by providing the source, origin, purity, chemical composition and structure, vehicle, concentration and
amount in which it is to be delivered to the host.
(2) (i) The labelling, presentation and advertising shall not claim that the prebiotic has the property of preventing,
treating or curing a human disease, or refer to such properties.
(ii) The statement by the food business operator relating to structure or function or the general well-being of the
body may be allowed by the Food Authority, if the statement is supported by the generally accepted scientific
data.
(iii) Every package of food containing prebiotics shall carry the following information on the label, namely:-
(a) the words “PREBIOTIC FOOD”;
(b) name of prebiotic;
(c) the suggested or recommended serving size which shall deliver the effective dose of prebiotic related to
the health claim;
(d) an advisory warning ‘NOT FOR MEDICINAL USE’ prominently written;
(e) a warning or any other precautions to be taken while consuming, known side effects, if any,
contraindications, and product-drug interactions, as applicable.
 (3) No food business operator shall use additives in prebiotic preparations except those specified in Schedule VA to
Schedule VF.
12. Specialty food containing plant or botanical ingredients with safe history of usage.- (1) (i) A food business
operator shall use only plant or botanical ingredients specified in Schedule IV for the preparation of specialty
food containing plant or botanical ingredients.
(ii) The plant or botanical ingredient which is not specified in these regulations but its safety has been established in
India or in any other country, may be manufactured or sold in India only after taking prior approval of the Food
Authority.
(iii) The application for approval to the Food Authority shall be accompanied by documented history of usage of at
least fifteen years in India, or thirty years in the country of origin.
(2) The health supplement or nutraceutical or food for special dietary use or food for special medical purpose may
contain the ingredient as specified in Schedule IV, formulated either alone or in combination of ingredients or
botanicals or their extracts either in unprocessed or in approved processed forms, formulated in a regular or
conventional food format such as liquid or syrup, suspension or powder, granule, tablet or capsule or any other
format approved by the Food Authority.
(3) (i) Every manufacturer or importer shall prepare and maintain a product information file, which shall contain
information on the ingredients from Schedule IV used, finished product quality confirmation, and the test
methods to demonstrate the presence of the active ingredient in the food.
(ii) The usage level of the specialty food containing plant or botanical ingredients shall not exceed those levels
specified in Schedule IV:
Provided that the usage level may be distributed or provided, or formulated for delivery in one portion daily, or
distributed in more than one portion to be taken in a day.
(iii) To use any other plant or botanical ingredient, which is not specified in Schedule IV, the food business operator
shall seek prior approval of the Food Authority by submitting-
(a) a product information file containing information on the material used;
(b) quality confirmation, test methods to demonstrate the presence of the ingredient in the food;
(c) relevant published literature providing scientific and technical information of the material or
product related to safety and health benefits; and
(d) any human intervention study published or conducted, and other relevant information.
(iv) The product information file shall be produced for inspection and review by the Food Authority as and when
called for.
(v) The product information file shall primarily consist of technical and scientific information covering the
following, namely:-
(a) information on quality of all raw ingredients with official scientific or botanical name;
(b) details of formulation or block diagram and brief description of the processing methods or steps
adopted;
(c) shelf life study data;
(d) quality specifications and test methods for analysis of the finished product;
(e) safety and pharmacological information, literature base, and additional study, if any conducted;
(f) information on human studies, if any;
(g) regulatory status in other countries, if any; and
(h) any other relevant product information.
(4) No food business operator shall use additives for preparation of specialty food containing plant or botanical
ingredients except those specified in Schedule VE or Schedule VF.
13. Novel food.– (1)(i) For the purposes of these regulations novel food is a food that-
(a) may not have a history of human consumption; or
(b) may have any ingredient used in it which or the source from which it is derived, may not have a history of
human consumption; or
(c) a food or ingredient obtained by new technology with innovative engineering process, where the process may
give rise to significant change in the composition or structure or size of the food or food ingredients which may
alter the nutritional value, metabolism or level of undesirable substances.
(ii) No novel food shall be manufactured or imported for commercial purpose without the prior approval of the Food
Authority by filing an application along with all relevant documents and details as specified by the Food
Authority from time to time.
(2) The labelling of novel food shall be-
(i) in accordance with the specific labelling requirements, if any; or
(ii) specific to claims relating to the novel product; or
(iii) as per the category notified by the Food Authority in the specific regulations. 
Schedule – I
[See regulations 3.(13), 4.(2), 6.(2)(i), 7.(2)(i), 8.(2)(i) and 9.(2)(i)]
List of vitamins and minerals and their components

1. **Vitamins and Minerals Components:**

A. **Vitamins:**

1. **Vitamin A:** 
   - Retinol – all trans retinol
   - Retinyl acetate
   - Retinyl palmitate

2. **Provitamin A:** 
   - Beta-Carotene

3. **Vitamin B1:** 
   - Thiamine chloride hydrochloride
   - Thiamine mononitrate

4. **Vitamin B2:** 
   - Riboflavin
   - Riboflavin 5’- phosphate, sodium

5. **Vitamin B6:** 
   - Pyridoxine hydrochloride
   - Pyridoxal 5’-phosphate

6. **Vitamin B12:** 
   - Cyanocobalamin
   - Hydroxocobalamin

7. **Vitamin C:** 
   - L-ascorbic acid
   - Sodium-L-ascorbate
   - Calcium-L-ascorbate
   - Potassium-L-ascorbate
   - 6-palmitoyl-L-ascorbic acid
   - Ascorbyl palmitate

8. **Vitamin D:** 
   - Vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol) – Animal source
   - Vitamin D2 (ergocalciferol) – Plant source

9. **Vitamin E:** 
   - D-alpha-tocopherol
   - DL-alpha-tocopherol
   - D-alpha-tocopheryl acetate
   - DL-alpha-tocopheryl acetate
   - D-alpha-tocopheryl acid succinate
   - DL-alpha-tocopheryl acid succinate
   - DL-alpha-tocopheryl polyethylene glycol succinate

10. **Vitamin K1:** 
    - Phylloquinone
    - Phytomenadione (2-methyl 3-phytyl-1)
    - 1,4-napthoquinone
    - Phytonamidione

11. **Vitamin K2 (MK-7):** 
    - Menaquinone

12. **Vitamin K2 (MK-4):** 
    - Menatetrenone

13. **Biotin:** 
    - D-biotin

14. **Folic Acid:** 
    - n-pteroyl-l-glutamic acid

15. **Niacin:** 
    - Nicotinic acid
    - Nicotinamide
    - Nicotinic acid amide

16. **Pantothenic acid:** 
    - D-pantothenate, calcium
    - D-pantothenate, sodium
    - D-panthenol
    - DL-panthenol
    - Sodium-D-pantothenate

B. **Minerals (Chemical sources):**

1. **Calcium:** 
   - Calcium carbonate
   - Calcium chloride
   - Calcium salts of citric acid
   - Calcium gluconate
   - Calcium glycerophosphate
   - Calcium orthophosphate
   - Calcium hydroxide
   - Calcium oxide
   - Calcium phosphate, monobasic
   - Calcium phosphate, dibasic
   - Calcium phosphate, tribasic
   - Calcium sulphate
   - Calcium from algal source (Algus calcarius)
   - Calcium lactate

2. **Chloride:** 
   - Calcium chloride
   - Choline chloride
   - Magnesium chloride
   - Manganese chloride
   - Potassium chloride
   - Sodium chloride

3. **Chromium:** 
   - Chromium (III) chloride
   - Chromium (III) sulphate

4. **Copper:** 
   - Cupric carbonate
   - Cupric citrate
   - Cupric gluconate
   - Cupric sulphate
   - Copper lysine complex

5. **Iodine:** 
   - Sodium iodide
   - Sodium iodate
   - Potassium iodide
   - Potassium iodate

6. **Iron:** 
   - Ferrous succinate
   - Ferrous citrate
   - Ferric ammonium citrate
   - Ferrous gluconate
   - Ferrous fumarate
   - Ferric sodium di-phosphate
   - Ferrous lactate
   - Ferrous sulphate
   - Ferric di-phosphate
   - Ferric saccharate
   - Ferrous bis glycinate
   - Hydrogen reduced iron
   - Sodium iron EDTA
   - Carbonyl iron
   - Ferrous orthophosphate
   - Ferrous sodium pyrophosphate
   - Elemental iron
   - Electrolytic iron

7. **Magnesium:** 
   - Magnesium aspartate
   - Magnesium carbonate
   - Magnesium chloride
   - Magnesium gluconate
   - Magnesium phosphate dibasic (Magnesium hydrogen phosphate)
   - Magnesium phosphate tribasic (Trimagnesium phosphate)
   - Magnesium oxide
   - Magnesium sulphate

8. **Manganese:** 
   - Manganese carbonate
   - Manganese chloride
   - Manganese citrate
   - Manganese sulphate
   - Manganese gluconate
   - As amino acid chelate

9. **Molybdenum:** 
   - Ammonium molybdate (Molybdenum (VI))
   - Sodium molybdate (Molybdenum (VI))
   - As amino acid chelate

10. **Phosphorous:** 
    - Potassium glycerophosphate
    - Potassium phosphate, monobasic
    - Potassium phosphate, dibasic

11. **Potassium:** 
    - Potassium bicarbonate
    - Potassium carbonate
    - Potassium chloride
    - Potassium citrate
    - Potassium gluconate
    - Potassium glycerophosphate
    - Potassium lactate
    - Potassium monobasic phosphate
    - Potassium dibasic phosphate

12. **Selenium:** 
    - Sodium selenate
    - Sodium selenite
    - Sodium hydrogen selenite
    - Selenomethionine

13. **Sodium:** 
    - Sodium bicarbonate
    - Sodium carbonate
    - Sodium chloride
    - Sodium citrate (Trisodium citrate)
    - Sodium gluconate
    - Sodium lactate
    - Sodium phosphate monobasic (Sodium dihydrogen phosphate)
    - Sodium phosphate dibasic (disodium hydrogen phosphate)
    - Sodium sulphate

14. **Zinc:** 
    - Zinc acetate
    - Zinc chloride
    - Zinc citrate
    - Zinc gluconate
    - Zinc lactate
    - Zinc oxide
    - Zinc carbonate
    - Zinc sulphate

15. **Boron:** 
    - Boron proteonate


Note- Suitable esters and salts of vitamins and salts and chelates of minerals may be used


C. **Permissible overages:**

1. Vitamin A - 30%
2. Vitamin C - 20%
3. Vitamin D - 30%
4. Vitamin E - 10%
5. Thiamine (vitamin B1) - 25%
6. Riboflavin (vitamin B2) - 25%
7. Niacin (vitamin B3) - 10%
8. Vitamin B6 - 25%
9. Vitamin B12 - 25%
10. Folic acid - 25%
11. Pantothenic acid - 10%
12. Vitamin K1 - 30%
13. Minerals - 10%
14. Iodine - 20%

* Overage means the amount of excess nutrients added above label claim during manufacture as a means of maintaining
at least the claimed amount of the ingredient(s) for the normal shelf life of the product to compensate for the expected
manufacturing / storage loss and to allow for variation in assay performance. Where overages are more than those listed
in Schedule I, Table C, the same shall be scientifically substantiated.


Schedule – II
[See regulations 3.(13), 4.(2), 6.(2)(i), 7.(2)(i), 8.(2)(i) and 9.(2)(i)]
List of amino acids and other nutrients

A. **Essential Amino Acids:**

(i) L-Histidine  
(ii) L-Histidine hydrochloride  
(iii) L-Isoleucine  
(iv) L-Isoleucine hydrochloride  
(v) L-Leucine  
(vi) L-Leucine hydrochloride  
(vii) L-Lysine  
(viii) L-Lysine hydrochloride  
(ix) DL-Methionine  
(x) L-Cysteine  
(xi) L-Cysteine hydrochloride  
(xii) L-Aspartic acid  
(xiii) L-Arginine L-aspartate  
(xiv) L-Threonine  
(xv) L-Alanine  
(xvi) L-Phenylalanine  
(xvii) L-Cysteine hydrochloride  
(xviii) L-Tyrosine  
(xix) L-Arginine  
(xx) L-Tryptophan  
(xxi) L-Valine  
(xxii) L-Arginine hydrochloride  

B. **Non-Essential Amino Acids:**

(i) L-Carnitine  
(ii) L-Carnitine hydrochloride  
(iii) Carnitine, acetyl-L  
(iv) L-Glutamic acid  
(v) L-Glutamine  
(vi) Glycine  
(vii) L-Hydroxylysine  
(viii) L-Hydroxyproline  
(ix) L-Lysine acetate  
(x) N-acetyl-L-cysteine  
(xi) L-Ornithine  
(xii) L-Ornithine mono hydrochloride  
(xiii) L-Lysine-L-aspartate  
(xiv) L-Citrulline  
(xv) L-Proline  
(xvi) L-Lysine-L-glutamate dihydrate  
(xvii) Magnesium L-aspartate  
(xviii) Calcium L-glutamate  
(xix) Potassium L-glutamate  
(xx) Carnitine tartrate  
(xxi) Taurine  
(xxii) Choline  
(xxiii) Choline chloride  
(xxiv) Choline citrate  
(xxv) L-Serine  
(xxvi) Tyrosine, acetyl-L  
(xxvii) Choline hydrogen tartrate  
(xxviii) Myo-inositol  

C. **Nucleotides:**

(i) Adenosine 5-monophosphate (AMP)  
(ii) Cytidine 5-monophosphate (CMP)  
(iii) Guanosine 5-monophosphate (GMP)  
(iv) Inosine 5-monophosphate (IMP)  
(v) Disodium uridine 5-monophosphate  
(vi) Disodium guanosine 5-monophosphate  
(vii) Disodium inosine 5-monophosphate


Schedule – III
[See regulations 3.(13), 4.(2), 8.(2)(i), 8.(2)(iv), 9.(2)(i), 9.(2)(iv) and 9.(2)(v)]
Values for vitamins, minerals and trace elements allowed to be used in food for special dietary use and food for
special medical purpose (other than those intended for use in infant formula)

1. Vitamins

**RDA for Vitamins**

**Vitamins Per 100 kJ:**

- Vitamin A (µg RE): Minimum 8.4, Maximum 43
- Vitamin D (µg): Minimum 0.12, Maximum 0.65 (0.75)^1
- Vitamin K (µg): Minimum 0.85, Maximum 5
- Vitamin C (mg): Minimum 0.54, Maximum 5.25
- Thiamin (mg): Minimum 0.015, Maximum 0.12
- Riboflavin (mg): Minimum 0.02, Maximum 0.12
- Vitamin B6 (mg): Minimum 0.02, Maximum 0.12
- Niacin (mg NE): Minimum 0.22, Maximum 0.75
- Folic acid (µg): Minimum 2.5, Maximum 12.5
- Vitamin B12 (µg): Minimum 0.017, Maximum 0.17
- Pantothenic acid (mg): Minimum 0.035, Maximum 0.35
- Biotin (µg): Minimum 0.18, Maximum 1.8
- Vitamin E (mg α-TE): 0.5/g of polyunsaturated fatty acids expressed as linoleic acid but in no case less than 0.1 mg per 100 available kJ, Maximum 0.75

**Vitamins Per 100 kcal:**

- Vitamin A (µg RE): Minimum 35, Maximum 180
- Vitamin D (µg): Minimum 0.5, Maximum 2.5 (3)^1
- Vitamin K (µg): Minimum 3.5, Maximum 20
- Vitamin C (mg): Minimum 2.25, Maximum 22
- Thiamin (mg): Minimum 0.06, Maximum 0.5
- Riboflavin (mg): Minimum 0.08, Maximum 0.5
- Vitamin B6 (mg): Minimum 0.08, Maximum 0.5
- Niacin (mg NE): Minimum 0.9, Maximum 3
- Folic acid (µg): Minimum 10, Maximum 50
- Vitamin B12 (µg): Minimum 0.07, Maximum 0.7
- Pantothenic acid (mg): Minimum 0.15, Maximum 1.5
- Biotin (µg): Minimum 0.75, Maximum 7.5
- Vitamin E (mg α-TE): 0.5/g of polyunsaturated fatty acids expressed as linoleic acid but in no case less than 0.1 mg per 100 available kcal, Maximum 3

For products intended for children of 1 to 10 years of age; NE – Niacin equivalent;
TE – Tocopherol equivalent.
* When no upper safe level (maximum permissible level higer than 1 (100 percent ) RDA) has been specified for a
particular vitamins and minerals, the content of such nutrient shall not exceed NOAEL (No observed adverse effect level)
or one tenth of LOAEL (Lowest observed adverse effect level) 



2. Minerals

**RDA for Minerals**

**Minerals Per 100 kJ:**

- Sodium (mg): Minimum 7.2, Maximum 42
- Chloride (mg): Minimum 7.2, Maximum 42
- Potassium (mg): Minimum 19, Maximum 70
- Calcium (mg): Minimum 8.4 (12)^1, Maximum 42 (60)^1
- Phosphorus (mg): Minimum 7.2, Maximum 19
- Magnesium (mg): Minimum 1.8, Maximum 6
- Iron (mg): Minimum 0.12, Maximum 0.5
- Zinc (mg): Minimum 0.12, Maximum 0.36
- Copper (µg): Minimum 15, Maximum 125
- Iodine (µg): Minimum 1.55, Maximum 8.4
- Selenium (µg): Minimum 0.6, Maximum 2.5
- Manganese (mg): Minimum 0.012, Maximum 0.12
- Chromium (µg): Minimum 0.3, Maximum 3.6
- Molybdenum (µg): Minimum 0.72, Maximum 4.3

**Minerals Per 100 kcal:**

- Sodium (mg): Minimum 30, Maximum 175
- Chloride (mg): Minimum 30, Maximum 175
- Potassium (mg): Minimum 80, Maximum 295
- Calcium (mg): Minimum 35 (50)^1, Maximum 175 (250)^1
- Phosphorus (mg): Minimum 30, Maximum 80
- Magnesium (mg): Minimum 7.5, Maximum 25
- Iron (mg): Minimum 0.5, Maximum 2.0
- Zinc (mg): Minimum 0.5, Maximum 1.5
- Copper (µg): Minimum 60, Maximum 500
- Iodine (µg): Minimum 6.5, Maximum 35
- Selenium (µg): Minimum 2.5, Maximum 10
- Manganese (mg): Minimum 0.05, Maximum 0.5
- Chromium (µg): Minimum 1.25, Maximum 15
- Molybdenum (µg): Minimum 3.5, Maximum 18


 For products intended for children of 1 to 10 years of age;
*When no upper safe level (maximum permissible level higer that 1 (100 per cent) RDA) has been specified for a
particular nutrient the content of such nutrient shall not exceed NOAEL (No observed adverse effect level) or one tenth
of LOAEL (Lowest observed adverse effect level)



Schedule – IV
[See regulations 3.(13), 4.(2), 6.(2)(i), 7.(2)(i), 7.(3)(v), 8.(2)(i), 9.(2)(i), 12.(1)(i), 12.(2), 12.(3)(i), 12.(3)(ii) and
12.(3)(iii)]
List of plant or botanical ingredients


1. Abelmoschus esculentus (L.) Moench. Fruit/Root, commonly known as Bhindi, is permitted at 5-10 g (as powder) for adults per day.

2. Abies spectabilis (D.Don) / A. pindrow Royle Leaves, commonly known as Talis patra / Talis bhed, is permitted at 2-4 g (as powder) for adults per day.

3. Asculus indica colebs./ A. hippocastanum Fruit /kernel, commonly known as Indian Horse Chestnut/ kanar, is permitted at 10-20 g for adults per day.

4. Abelmoschus moschatus Seed, commonly known as Lata kasturi, is permitted at 3-5 g for adults per day.

5. Abutilon indicum (L.) Sweet ssp. Indicum / A. fruiticosum Seed/Root, commonly known as Atibala, is permitted at 5-10 g (as powder) for adults per day.

6. Acacia arabica Willd. (Now known as Acacia nilotica (L.) Willd. ex Del. ssp. indica (Benth.) Brenan) Gum, commonly known as Babbula, is permitted at 5-10 g for adults per day.

7. Acacia arabica Willd. (Now known as Acacia nilotica (L.) Willd. ex Del. ssp. indica (Benth.) Brenan) Stem bark, commonly known as Babbula, is permitted at 5-10 g for adults per day.

8. Acacia catechu Extract, commonly known as Katha/khair, is permitted at 1-3 g for adults per day.

9. Achyranthes aspera (L.)/ A. bidentala Seed/Plant, commonly known as Chirchida, is permitted at 3-5 g (as powder) for adults per day.

10. Adhatoda zeylanica / A. vasaka Leaf/Root/Flower, commonly known as Adusa/Vasa, is permitted at 5-10 g for adults per day.

11. Aegle marmelos (L.) Corr. Unripe fruit pulp, commonly known as Bael, is permitted at 5-10 g for adults per day.

12. Aegle marmelos (L.) Corr. Ripe fruit, commonly known as Bael, is permitted at 50-100 g (as pulp) for adults per day.

13. Aegle marmelos (L.) Corr. Leaves/Bark, commonly known as Bael Pather/Bael chhal, is permitted at 5 -10 g (as pulp) for adults per day.

14. Ajuga bracteosa wall Plant, commonly known as Neel Kanthi, is permitted at 2-3 g for adults per day.

15. Alangium salvifolium (L.f.) Wang. ssp. salvifolium Fruit, commonly known as Ankota, is permitted at 10-20 g (as powder) for adults per day.

16. Albizia lebbeck (L.) Benth/A. Procera/A.odoratissima Flower, commonly known as Siris, is permitted at 3-6 g (as powder) for adults per day.

17. Albizia lebbeck (L.) Benth/A. Procera/A.odoratissima Seed, commonly known as Siris, is permitted at 1-3 g (as powder) for adults per day.

18. Albizia lebbeck (L.) Benth/A. Procera/A.odoratissima Stem bark, commonly known as Siris, is permitted at 3-6 g for adults per day.

19. Albizia lebbeck (L.) Benth/A. Procera/A.odoratissima Leaf, commonly known as Siris, is permitted at 3-6 g (as powder) for adults per day.

20. Alpinia galanga Rhizome, commonly known as Kulanjan, is permitted at 2-4 g for adults per day.

21. Allium cepa L. Bulb, commonly known as Pyaja, is permitted at 10-20 g for adults per day.

22. Allium cepa L. Seed, commonly known as Pyaja, is permitted at 1-3 g (as powder) for adults per day.

23. Allium cepa L. Leaf, commonly known as Pyaja, is permitted at 20-40 g (as vegetable) for adults per day.

24. Allium sativum L. Bulb, commonly known as Lahsuna, is permitted at 3-6 g for adults per day (Not recommended during pregnancy).

25. Allium sativum L. Leaf, commonly known as Lahsuna, is permitted at 20-40 g (as vegetable) for adults per day.

26. Allium stracheyi Bakerno Whole plant, commonly known as Farana, is permitted at 2-3 g for adults per day.

27. Alocasia indica Spach (Now known as Alocasia macrorhiza (L.) G. Don) Tuber, commonly known as Mankanda, is permitted at 5-10 g for adults per day.

28. Aloe barbadensis Mill. / A. Ferox / A. vera Leaf, commonly known as Ghikvar, is permitted at 5-10 g for adults per day.

29. Aloe barbadensis Mill. / A. Ferox / A. vera Dry leaf juice, commonly known as Elua - Mussabar, is permitted at 0.5 -1 g for adults per day.

30. Althaea officinalis Linn Flower/Root, commonly known as Resh-Khatmi, is permitted at 5-10 g (as powder) for adults per day.

31. Alternanthera sessilis (L.) R. Br. ex DC. Whole plant, commonly known as Gudarisaga, is permitted at 3-5 g (as powder) for adults per day.

32. Amaranthus gangeticus L. (Now known as Amaranthus tricolor L.) / Amaranthus blitum L. Aerial part, commonly known as Lal marsa – Sag marsa, is permitted at 10-20 g (as leafy vegetable) for adults per day.

33. Amaranthus spinosus L. / A. paniculatus L. (A. hybridus L.) Whole plant, commonly known as Chaulai Kateli / Jal Chaulai, is permitted at 20-30 g (as leafy vegetable) for adults per day.

34. Amomum aromaticum Roxb. / A. aromaticum Seed, commonly known as Bangiya Ela, is permitted at 2-4 g (as powder) for adults per day.

35. Amomum subulatum Roxb./ A. aromaticum Fruit, commonly known as Badi Elaichi, is permitted at 1-3 g (as powder) for adults per day.

36. Amomum subulatum Roxb./ A. aromaticum Seed, commonly known as Badi Elaichi, is permitted at 1-2 g (as powder) for adults per day.

37. Amorphophallus campanulatus (Roxb.) Blume ex Decne Corm, commonly known as Jimikanda, is permitted at 20-50 g (as vegetables) for adults per day.

38. Anacardium occidentale L. Fruit Kernel, commonly known as Kaju, is permitted at 10-20 g for adults per day.

39. Anacyclus pyrethum DC. Root, commonly known as Akarkara, is permitted at 100 - 250 mg (as powder) for adults per day (Not recommended for children below 5 years).

40. Anacyclus pyrethum DC. Seed, commonly known as Akarkara, is permitted at 100 - 250 mg (as powder) for adults per day (Not recommended for children below 5 years).

41. Ananas comosus (L.) Merr. Pineapple, is permitted at 50-100 g (as fruit) or 50-100 ml (as juice) for adults per day (Not recommended during pregnancy).

42. Anethum sowa Roxb. ex Flem. (Now known as Anethum graveolens L.) Fruit, commonly known as Sowa, is permitted at 3-6 g (as powder (fruit)) for adults per day.

43. Anethum sowa Roxb. ex Flem. (Now known as Anethum graveolens L.) Leaf, commonly known as Sowa, is permitted at 10-20 g (as powder (leaf)) for adults per day.

44. Angelica glauca Edgew./ Angelica archangelica L. Root and Root stock, commonly known as Chora, is permitted at 1-3 g (as powder) for adults per day.

45. Annona squamosa L./A.reticulata /A. muricata/ A. Cherimola Fruit pulp, commonly known as Shareefa / Shareefa bhed, is permitted at 20-30 g (as fruit pulp) for adults per day.

46. Annona squamosa L./A.reticulata /A. muricata/ A. Cherimola Leaf, commonly known as Shareefa, is permitted at 3-5 g (as powder) for adults per day (Not recommended for children below 16 years).


47. The tender shoots (young leaf) of Bambusa arundinacea (Retz.) Willd. are known as Bansh and can be used in a dosage of 20-30 g (as vegetable). The seed of Bambusa arundinacea (Retz.) Willd. is called Bansh chaval and can be used in a dosage of 20-30 g (as powder). The crystals of Bambusa arundinacea (Retz.) Willd. are called Bansalochan and can be used in a dosage of 0.5-2g (as powder).

48. The whole plant of Bacopa monnieri is called Brahmi and can be used in a dosage of 5-10 g (as powder). The extract of Bacopa monnieri is called Brahmigha and can be used in a dosage of 1-2 g.

49. The leaf of Basella alba L. is known as Poyi Saag and can be used in a dosage of 20-30 g (as vegetable).

50. The stem bark of Bauhinia variegata L. / Bauhinia purpurea L. / B. tomentosa. Linn is known as Kachnar / Sona and can be used in a dosage of 3-6 g. The flower/buds of Bauhinia variegata L. / Bauhinia purpurea L. / B. tomentosa. Linn are called Kachnar / Sona and can be used in a dosage of 10-20 g (as juice).

51. The fruit of Benincasa hispida (Thunb.) Cogn. is known as Petha, Bhatua and can be used in a dosage of 30-50 g (as vegetable).

52. The fruit of Berberis aristata DC./ B. asiatica / B. lycium / B. vulgaris is known as Daruhaldi and can be used in a dosage of 5-10 g (as fruit). The stem extract of Berberis aristata DC./ B. asiatica / B. lycium / B. vulgaris is called Rasaunt and can be used in a dosage of 0.5-1 g.

53. The tuber of Beta vulgaris L. is known as Chukandar and can be used in a dosage of 10-20 ml (as juice).

54. The aerial part of Boerhaavia diffusa L. (Now known as Boerhaavia repens L. var. diffusa (L.) Hook.f.) / B. verticillata is known as Saag itsit and can be used in a dosage of 20-30 g (as aerial parts). The root of Boerhaavia diffusa L. (Now known as Boerhaavia repens L. var. diffusa (L.) Hook.f.) / B. verticillata is called Vishkhaprs and can be used in a dosage of 10-15 g (as root).

55. The stem bark of Bombax ceiba L. is known as Semal and can be used in a dosage of 5-10 g. The flower of Bombax ceiba L. is called Semal and can be used in a dosage of 10-20 ml (as juice). The gum of Bombax ceiba L. is called Semal and can be used in a dosage of 1-3 g (as powder). The root of Bombax ceiba L. is called Semal Musali and can be used in a dosage of 5-10 g (as powder).

56. The fruit/flower/root of Bombax malabarica / Salmalia malabarica is known as Semal/Semar and can be used in a dosage of 10-20 g.

57. The oleoresin of Boswellia serrata Roxb. is called Salai guggal and can be used in a dosage of 2-4 g.

58. The dried inflorescence of Borassus flabellifer L. is known as Tarkul/Taad and can be used in a dosage of 1-3 g (as powder). The seed pulp of unripe fruit of Borassus flabellifer L. is called Tarkul/Taad and can be used in a dosage of 10-30 g. The exudate of stem/sap of Borassus flabellifer L. is known as Tarkul/Taad and can be used in a dosage of 100-200 ml (as juice).

59. The root of B. verticillata can be used in a dosage of 10-15 g.

60. The seed of Brassica campestris L. (Now known as Brassica rapa L. sp. campestris (L.) Clapham) is known as Sarson and can be used in a dosage of 10-20 g (as paste). The seed oil of Brassica campestris L. is called Sarson and can be used in a dosage of 10-20 ml. The leaf of Brassica campestris L. is known as Sarson and can be used in a dosage of 10-30 g (as leafy vegetable).

61. The seed of Brassica juncea (L.) Czern. is known as Rai and can be used in a dosage of 1-2 g. The leaf of Brassica juncea (L.) Czern. is called Rai and can be used in a dosage of 10-20 g (as leafy vegetable).

62. The seeds of Brassica nigra (L.) Koch. are known as Banarasi rai and can be used in a dosage of 0.5-1 g.

63. The tuber of Brassica rapa L. is known as Shalgam and can be used in a dosage of 20-40 g. The leaf of Brassica rapa L. is called Shalgam and can be used in a dosage of 20-30 g (as vegetable).

64. The seed of Buchanania lanzan Spreng. is known as Cherounjee and can be used in a dosage of 5-10 g (as powder).

65. The seed/gum/root/bark of Butea monosperma is known as Dhark and can be used in a dosage of 3-6 g.

66. The plant Bixa orellana is known as Annato Plant and can be used in a dosage of 1-3 g.

67. The leaf of Caesalpinia bonducella (L.) Flem. (Now known as Caesalpinia bonduc (L.) Roxb.) is known as Karanjuva and can be used in a dosage of 2-3 g. The seed of Caesalpinia bonducella (L.) Flem. is called Karanjuva and can be used in a dosage of 2-3 g.

68. The seed of Cajanus cajan (Linn.) Millsp. is known as Arahar / Tuvar and can be used in a dosage of 30-50 g.

69. The tea leaf/extract of Camellia sinensis is known as Chaya / Tea extract and can be used in a dosage of 1-2 g. The tea catachins of Camellia sinensis are called Green tea catechins and can be used in a dosage of 0.5-1 g.

70. The seed of Canavalia ensiformis sensu Baker (Now known as Canavalia gladiata (Jacq.) DC.) is known as Sema and can be used in a dosage of 5-10 g.

71. The leaf of Canscora decussata (Roxb.) J.F. and J.H. Schult. is known as Bangiya Sankhapuspi and can be used in a dosage of 2-4 g (as powder).

72. The fruit of Capparis decidua (Forssk.) Edgew. is known as Kareer / Dela and can be used in a dosage of 10-20 g.

73. The unripe fruit of Capsicum annum L. var. annum is known as Hari Mircha and can be used in a dosage of 1-2 g. The ripe fruit of Capsicum annum L. var. annum is called Lal Mircha and can be used in a dosage of 0.5-1.0 g (as powder). Both are not recommended for children below 5 years.

74. The fruit of Capsicum frutescens L. is known as Simla Mirch and can be used in a dosage of 30-50 g (as vegetable).

75. The ripe fruit of Carica papaya L. is known as Papita and can be used in a dosage of 50-100 g (as ripe fruit). The unripe fruit of Carica papaya L. is called Papita and can be used in a dosage of 30-50 g (as unripe fruit).

76. The fruit of Carissa carandas L. is known as Karounda and can be used in a dosage of 5-10 g.

77. The fruit of Carissa spinarum L. is known as Karawan and can be used in a dosage of 5-10 g.

78. The flower head of Carthamus tinctorius L. is known as Barre and can be used in a dosage of 2-4 g (as powder). The seed of Carthamus tinctorius L. is called Barre and can be used in a dosage of 2-4 g (as powder). The seed oil of Carthamus tinctorius L.

79. Carum carvi L.: Caraway fruit, known as Syaha jeera, is used in quantities of 1-3 grams as powder.
80. Cassia absus L.: Chaksu seed is used in quantities of 2-5 grams.
81. Cassia occidentalis L.: Kasoundi leaf is used in quantities of 5-10 grams, and Kasoundi seed in quantities of 1-3 grams.
82. Cassia tora L.: Chakvad leaf is used in quantities of 10-20 grams, and Chakwad seed in quantities of 3-5 grams as powder.
83. Cassia fistula: Amaltas fruit pulp is used in quantities of 10-20 grams, and Amaltas seed in quantities of 2-5 grams.
84. Cassia angustifolia / C. acutifolia: Sanay or Senna seed and leaves are used in quantities of 3-6 grams.
85. Cedrus deodar Roxb.: Devdar seed, wood, or oil is used in quantities of 5-10 grams or 2-4 ml respectively.
86. Celosia argentea L. var. argentea: Surwali or Safed murga seed is used in quantities of 3-6 grams.
87. Celastrus paniculatus: Malkanguni seed or oil is used in quantities of 5-10 grams or 2-4 ml respectively.
88. Centella asiatica (L.) Urban: Brahmi or Galpatri leaf or whole plant is used in quantities of 20-30 grams as vegetable, and Brahmi extract in quantities of 1-3 grams.
89. Centratherum anthelminticum: Kali-jirii or Vanjirii fruit or seed is used in quantities of 3-6 grams.
90. Chenopodium album L.: Bathua whole plant or leaves are used in quantities of 20-30 grams as leafy vegetable, and Bathua seed in quantities of 2-5 grams.
91. Chlorophytum borivillianum / C. arundinaceum / C. tuberosum: Musali is used in quantities of 5-10 grams.
92. Cicca acida (L.) Merrill: Harfa rewadi fruit is used in quantities of 10-20 grams.
93. Cicer arietinum L.: Chana or Kalachana tender leaf is used in quantities of 30-50 grams as leafy vegetable, and Chana or Kalachana seed in quantities of 20-30 grams.
94. Cichorium endivia: Kasani seed is used in quantities of 5-10 grams.
95. Cinnamomum tamala Nees and Eberm. / C. wightii: Tejapatra leaf is used in quantities of 2-3 grams.
96. Cinnamomum zeylanicum Blume (Now known as Cinnamomum verum J. S. Presl.): Dalchini or Ceyloni stem bark is used in quantities of 1-2 grams (not recommended during pregnancy).
97. Cissampelos pareria L. var. hirsuta (Buch.-Ham. ex DC.) Forman: Padhi leaf or plant is used in quantities of 10-20 grams as powder.
98. Cissus quadrangularis L.: Hadjod aerial part is used in quantities of 10-20 grams as wet chutney (paste), and Hadjod stem in quantities of 3-6 grams.
99. Citrullus colocynthis (L.) Schard.: Indarun or Indrayan fruit is used in quantities of 0.25-0.5 grams as powder (not recommended during pregnancy).
100. Citrullus vulgaris Schrad. ex Eckl. and Zeyh. var. fistulosus (Stocks) Stewart: Tinda fruit is used in quantities of 20-40 grams as vegetable.
101. Citrullus lanatus (Thunb.) Matsura and Nakai: Tarbuj fruit pulp is used in quantities of 50-100 grams, and Tarbuj seed in quantities of 3-6 grams, with Tarbuj seed oil in quantities of 1-3 ml.
102. Citrus aurantifolia (Christm. and Panz.) Swingle: Nimbu fruit is used in quantities of 3-5 ml as juice.
103. Citrus limon (Linn.) Burm.f.: Jameerinibu fruit is used in quantities of 5-10 ml as juice.
104. Citrus maxima (Burm.) Merr.: Chakotara fruit is used in quantities of 5-10 ml as juice or 30-50 grams as fruit.
105. Citrus medica L. var. medica: Bijoura fruit is used in quantities of 5-10 ml as juice.
106. Citrus reticulata Blanc.: Narangi fruit is used in quantities of 30-50 ml as juice.
107. Citrus sinensis (L.) Osbeck: Mousami fruit is used in quantities of 50-100 ml as juice.
108. Clerodendrum phlomidis: Arani whole plant is used in quantities of 10-20 grams.
109. Clerodendrum serratum: Bharangi whole plant is used in quantities of 10-20 grams.
110. Coccinia grandis (L.) Voigt. / C. indica: Kundru phal or Kuntru shak leaf is used in quantities of 5-10 grams (not recommended for children below 5 years), Kundru stem in quantities of 3-6 grams as powder, and Kundru whole plant in quantities of 3-6 grams as powder, or 5-10 ml as juice, with Kundru fruit in quantities of 20-50 grams as vegetable.
111. Cocos nucifera L.: Nariyal endosperm is used in quantities of 10-20 grams, Nariyal jala in quantities of 100-200 ml, and Nariyal flower in quantities of 5-10 grams.

112. Cocculus hirsutus (L.) Theob.: Jalajamani leaf is used in quantities of 10-20 grams.
113. Coix lacryma-jobi L.: Gargri seed is used in quantities of 10-20 grams.
114. Coffea arabica: Coffea seed (dry/green) is used in quantities of 3-5 grams (not recommended for children below 5 years).
115. Coleus forskohlii / C.aromaticus: Pathachoor or Parn-yavani is used in quantities of 5-10 grams (not recommended for children below 5 years).
116. Colocasia antiquorum Schott. (Now Colocasia esculenta (L.) Schott.): Arui rhizome is used in quantities of 20-30 grams as vegetable (not recommended for children below 16 years).
117. Commelina bengalensis L.: Kausar whole plant is used in quantities of 3-6 grams.
118. Commiphora wightii: Guggal oleoresin is used in quantities of 2-4 grams (not recommended for children below 5 years).
119. Commiphora myrrha: Hirabol oleoresin is used in quantities of 2-4 grams (not recommended for children below 5 years).
120. Convolvulus pluricaulis: Shankh-pushpi whole plant is used in quantities of 10-20 grams.
121. Corchorus acutangulus Lam. (Now Corchorus aestuans L.): Chench aerial part is used in quantities of 10-20 ml.
122. Corchorus capsularis L.: Narcha aerial part is used in quantities of 10-20 ml as juice.
123. Corchorus olitorius L.: Palva Saag aerial part is used in quantities of 10-20 ml as juice.
124. Cordia dichotoma Forst. f. (Cordia wallichii G.Don): Lisora fruit is used in quantities of 10-20 grams.
125. Cordia rotthii Roem. and Schult. (Now Cordia gharaf (Forssk.) Ehrenb and Asch.): Chhota Lisora fruit is used in quantities of 10-20 grams.
126. Coriandrum sativum L.: Dhaniya fruit is used in quantities of 1-3 grams as powder, and Dhaniya aerial part in quantities of 10-20 ml as juice.
127. Costus speciosus: Kemuk tuber is used in quantities of 2-4 grams as powder (not recommended for children below 5 years).
128. Crataeva nurvala: Varana fruit, bark, or leaf is used in quantities of 10-20 grams.
129. Crocus sativus L.: Kumkum (Kesar) style and stigma is used in quantities of 25-50 mg (not recommended for children below 16 years).
130. Cucumis melo L.: Kharbooja fruit is used in quantities of 50-100 grams, and Kharbooja seed in quantities of 1-3 grams as powder.
131. Cucumis melo L. var. momordica Duthie and Fuller: Phoot fruit is used in quantities of 40-50 grams as vegetable.
132. Cucumis melo L. var. utilissimus (Roxb.) Duthie and Fuller: Kakri seed is used in quantities of 3-6 grams, and Kakri fruit in quantities of 50-100 grams as vegetable.
133. Cucumis sativus L.: Khira seed is used in quantities of 3-6 grams as powder, and Khira fruit in quantities of 50-100 grams as vegetable.
134. Cucurbita maxima Duch. ex Lam.: Kashiphal seed is used in quantities of 5-10 grams, and Kashiphal fruit in quantities of 50-100 grams as vegetable.
135. Cucurbita pepo L.: Safed Kaddu or safed petha fruit is used in quantities of 50-100 grams as vegetable, and Safed petha seed in quantities of 5-10 grams as powder.
136. Cuminum cyminum L.: Jeera fruit is used in quantities of 1-3 grams as powder.
137. Curculigo orchioides Gaertn.: Kalimushli tuber is used in quantities of 3-5 grams.
138. Curcuma amada Roxb.: Amahaldi rhizome is used in quantities of 5-10 grams as fresh or 2-4 grams as powder.
139. Curcuma angustifolia: Tavkshir root is used in quantities of 2-5 grams.
140. Curcuma longa L.: Haldi rhizome is used in quantities of 2-5 grams as powder, and fresh Haldi rhizome in quantities of 5-10 ml as juice.
141. Curcuma zedoaria Roxb. (Now Curcuma aromatica Salisb.): Kachur rhizome is used in quantities of 2-5 grams as powder.
142. Cyamopsis tetragonoloba: Guar pod, seed, or gum (Guar gum) is used in quantities of 20-30 grams as powder (pod/seed) or 5-10 grams as powder (gum).
143. Cymbopogon citratus (DC.) Stapf: Harichaya whole plant is used in quantities of 1-3 grams.
144. Cymbopogon coloratus Stapf: Manjan pullu aerial part is used in quantities of 1-3 grams.
145. Cymbopogon jwarankusa (Jones) Schult.: Lamajjaka root is used in quantities of 1-3 grams.
146. Cymbopogon martini (Roxb.) Wats.: Rosha ghas whole plant is used in quantities of 1-3 grams.
147. Cynodon dactylon (L.) Pers.: Duba leaf is used in quantities of 3-5 grams.
148. Cyperus rotundus L.: Nagarmotha rhizome is used in quantities of 2-5 grams.
149. Daucus carota L.: Gajar tuberous root is used in quantities of 50-100 grams as vegetable or 50-100 ml as juice, and Gajar seed in quantities of 1-2 grams as powder (not recommended during pregnancy).

150. Desmodium gangeticum / D. latifolium: Sarvan whole plant is used in quantities of 5-10 grams.
151. Dillenia indica L.: Chalta fleshy fresh sepals (fruit) is used in quantities of 40-50 grams as vegetable.
152. Dioscorea alata L. / D. deltoidea: Kathalu tuber or corm is used in quantities of 10-20 grams.
153. Dioscorea bulbifera L.: Genthi or Taradi tuber is used in quantities of 20-30 grams as vegetable or 5-10 grams as powder, and Genthi or Taradi extract in quantities of 1-2 grams as extract.
154. Dioscorea esculenta (Lour.) Burkill: Suthani tuber is used in quantities of 5-10 grams.
155. Dioscorea pentaphylla L.: Kantalu tuber is used in quantities of 5-10 grams.
156. Diplezia maxima: Lungru tender shoots are used in quantities of 30-50 grams.
157. Diospyros peregrina Gurke (Now Diospyros malabarica (Desr.) Kostel): Gab ripe fruit is used in quantities of 50-100 grams, and Gab unripe fruit in quantities of 4-8 grams as powder.
158. Dolichos biflorus L. (Now Vigna unguiculata (L.) Walp.): Kulathi seed is used in quantities of 30-50 grams.
159. Dolichos lablab L. (Now Lablab purpureus (L.) Sweet): Sem seed is used in quantities of 20-40 grams as seed or 30-40 grams as tender pod (vegetable).
160. Echinochloa frumentacea Link: Sanwa fruit is used in quantities of 50-100 grams.
161. Eclipta prostata L.: Bhangra whole plant is used in quantities of 3-6 grams as powder.
162. Elettaria cardamomum (L.) Maton: Choti elaichi seed is used in quantities of 250-500 mg as powder.
163. Eleusine coracana (L.) Gaertn. ssp. coracana: Madua caryopsis is used in quantities of 20-50 grams.
164. Emblica officinalis Gaertn. (Now Phyllanthus emblica L.): Anwala or Amla fruit is used in quantities of 20-30 grams as fresh fruit, 3-6 grams as powder, 5-10 ml as juice, and 2-4 grams as extract.
165. Embelia ribes Burm. f.: Bhabhiranga fruit is used in quantities of 1-2 grams (not recommended for females planning to conceive).
166. Enicostemma littorale Blume: Mamejwa plant is used in quantities of 2-3 grams.
167. Ephedra gerardiana Wall.: Somlata leaves or whole plant is used in quantities of 2-5 grams.
168. Euphorbia neriifolia / E. pilosa: Thuhar stem (tender after boiling) is used in quantities of 10-20 grams, and Thuhar leaf is used in quantities of 3-5 grams (not recommended for children below 5 years).
169. Euryale ferox Salisb.: Makhana seed is used in quantities of 20-30 grams as seed or 3-5 grams as powder.
170. Evolvulus alsinoides: Vishnukranta plant is used in quantities of 10-20 grams.
171. Fagopyrum esculenttum Moench.: Kottu seed is used in quantities of 50-100 grams.
172. Ferula asafoetida L.: Hing oleo-gum resin is used in quantities of 125 mg as powder.
173. Ficus benghalensis L.: Baragad fruit is used in quantities of 40-50 grams as fruit, and Baragad shoots are used in quantities of 5-10 grams.
174. Ficus carica L. / F. palmata / F. lacor: Anjeer fruit or leaf is used in quantities of 20-30 grams.
175. Ficus glomerata Roxb. (Now Ficus racemosa L.): Gular fruit or leaf is used in quantities of 20-30 grams as vegetable.
176. Ficus hispida L.f.: Kathgulara (Kakodumba) fruit is used in quantities of 10-20 grams, and Kathgulara tender leaf in quantities of 20-40 ml as juice.
177. Ficus religiosa L.: Pipal fruit or tender leaf is used in quantities of 5-10 grams.
178. Flacourtia jangomas (Lour.) Raeusch syn. F. cataphracta Roxb. ex Willd.: Paniyala fruit is used in quantities of 10-20 grams.
179. Flacourtia ramontchi L’Herit (Now Flacourtia indica (Burm.f.) Merr.): Katai or Kanghu fruit is used in quantities of 5-10 grams.
180. Foeniculum vulgare Mill.: Sounf fruit is used in quantities of 5-10 grams as powder.
181. Fumaria vaillantii (Lois.) Hook. f. and Thoms. var. indica Haussk. (Now Fumaria indica (Haussk.) Pugsley): Pittapapda leaves are used in quantities of 5-10 grams.
182. Garcinia indica (Thour.) Choisy / G. cambogia: Kokam mature fruit, butter, or oil is used in quantities of 10-20 ml as juice or 5-10 grams as powder.
183. Garcinia pedunculata Roxb. ex Buch.-Ham.: Amalbeda fruit rind is used in quantities of 5-10 ml or grams as juice or powder.
184. Gardenia turgida Roxb. (Now Ceriscoides turgida (Roxb.) Tirveng.): Kharahar gum is used in quantities of 1-3 grams as powder.
185. Gisekia pharnaceoides L.: Baluka Saga leaf is used in quantities of 5-10 grams.
186. Glycine max (L.) Merr.: Soyabean seed is used in quantities of 20-40 grams.
187. Glycyrrhiza glabra L.: Mulethi root and stolon are used in quantities of 5-10 grams as powder.

188. Gmelina arborea Roxb.: Gamhari fruit is used in quantities of 20-30 grams.
189. Gmelina asiatica L.: Badhara fruit is used in quantities of 20-30 grams.
190. Gossypium herbaceum: Kapas seed or root is used in quantities of 10-20 grams.
191. Grewia hirsuta Vahl: Gulsakari root is used in quantities of 5-10 grams.
192. Grewia populifolia Vahl (Now Grewia tenax (Forssk.) Fiori): Gangeran stem bark or fruit is used in quantities of 5-10 grams as powder.
193. Grewia tiliaefolia Vahl / G. sclerophylla: Dhamin fruit is used in quantities of 20-30 grams.
194. Gymnema sylvestre: Gudmar plant is used in quantities of 5-10 grams, and Gudmar extract in quantities of 1-2 grams.
195. Gynandropsis gynandra (L.) Briq. (Now Cleome gynandra L.): Hurhur seed is used in quantities of 1-3 grams as powder, and whole plant in quantities of 10-20 ml as juice.
196. Habenaria intermedia: Ridhi root tuber or rhizome is used in quantities of 3-5 grams.
197. Hedychium spicatum Ham ex Smith: Kapur-Kachari rhizome is used in quantities of 3-5 grams.
198. Hemidesmus indicus: Anantmula root or stem is used in quantities of 3-6 grams.
199. Hibiscus rosa-sinensis L.: Gudahal flower is used in quantities of 1-3 grams as powder (not recommended during pregnancy).
200. Hibiscus sabdariffa L.: Patawa leaf is used in quantities of 5-10 grams as powder, Patawa seed in quantities of 1-3 grams as powder, and ripe calyx in quantities of 5-10 grams as powder.
201. Hippophae rhamnoides L. / H. salicifolia: Amlavetasa fruit or leaf is used in quantities of 10-20 grams, and Amalvets extract in quantities of 1-3 grams.
202. Hordeum vulgare L.: Jaou fruit is used in quantities of 100-200 grams as powder, and whole plant in quantities of 10-20 grams.
203. Hygrophila spinosa: Makhana or Tal makhana is used in quantities of 20-30 grams.
204. Hypericum perforatum: Basant leaf is used in quantities of 3-6 grams, and Basant plant extract in quantities of 1-1.5 grams as extract.
205. Illicium verum Hook. f.: Badiyan Khatai fruit is used in quantities of 250-500 mg as powder.
206. Inula racemosa Hook: Pushkar mool root is used in quantities of 3-6 grams as powder.
207. Ipomoea aquatica Forssk.: Kalamisaag leaf is used in quantities of 20-30 grams.
208. Ipomoea batatas (L.) Lam.: Shakarkand tuber is used in quantities of 20-30 grams.
209. Ipomoea digitata auct. non L. (Now Ipomoea mauritiana Jacq.): Bilaikand root or tuber is used in quantities of 3-6 grams.
210. Juglans regia Linn.: Akhrot fruit, leaf, or bark is used in quantities of 10-20 grams.
211. Juniperus communis: Hauber flower or leaf is used in quantities of 5-10 grams.
212. Lagenaria vulgaris Ser. (Now Lagenaria siceraria (Mol.) Standl.): Alabu fresh fruit is used in quantities of 100-150 grams as vegetable, and Alabu seed in quantities of 1-3 grams as powder.
213. Lagerstroemia indica: Jarul leaf is used in quantities of 6-12 grams as powder, and fruit extract in quantities of 1-2 grams as extract.
214. Lagerstroemia parviflora: Sidh leaf is used in quantities of 6-12 grams as powder, and fruit extract in quantities of 1-2 grams as extract.
215. Lens culinaris Medik.: Masura seed is used in quantities of 20-40 grams as seed.
216. Lepidium sativum L.: Chansur seed is used in quantities of 3-6 grams as powder (not recommended during pregnancy), and Chansur aerial part in quantities of 50-100 grams as vegetable.
217. Leptadenia reticulata (Retz.) W. and A.: Dodisaka leaf is used in quantities of 20-30 grams as vegetable.
218. Leucas cephalotus (Koenig ex Roth) Spreng.: Guma leaf is used in quantities of 20-30 grams.
219. Limonia acidissima L.: Kaith fruit is used in quantities of 20-40 grams as fruit.
220. Linum usitatissimum L.: Atasi seed is used in quantities of 10-20 grams, and Atasi seed oil in quantities of 10-20 ml.
221. Litchi chinensis Sonner.: Litchi fruit is used in quantities of 50-100 grams.
222. Luffa acutangula (L.) Roxb.: Torai whole plant is used in quantities of 5-10 grams as powder, Torai fruit in quantities of 30-50 grams as vegetable, and Torai seed in quantities of 1-3 grams as powder.
223. Luffa cylindrica (L.) M. Roem.: Nenua fruit is used in quantities of 20-40 grams as vegetable, and Nenua seed in quantities of 1-3 grams as powder.
224. Lycopersicon esculentum Mill. (Now Lycopersicon lycopersicum (L.) Karsten.): Tamatar fruit is used in quantities of 20-40 grams as vegetable.
225. Madhuca indica Gmel. (Now Madhuca longifolia (Koen.) Macbride var. latifolia): Mahua flower is used in quantities of 10-15 grams as flower, Mahua fruit in quantities of 10-15 grams, and Mahua seed oil in quantities of 2-5 ml.

226. Madhuca longifolia (Koenig) Macbride var. longifolia: Jal mahua flower/fruit is consumed in quantities of 10-15 g.
227. Malva sylvestris L.: Gulkhair fruit and leaf are taken in amounts of 5-7 g and 3-6 g respectively as powder.
228. Mangifera indica L.: Ripe fruit of Aam is consumed in quantities ranging from 50-150 g, while unripe fruit pulp is taken in 10-30 g amounts. Aam beej/kernel seeds are taken in 1-2 g as powder, Aam leaf in 3-5 g, and Amara (ghan) extract in 0.5-1 g.
229. Maranta arundinacea L.: Ararota rhizome is consumed in 10-30 g as powder.
230. Marsilea minuta L.: Chowpatia leaf is consumed in 20-30 g as vegetable or 2-4 g as powder, and Chowpatia extract in 1-2 g.
231. Mentha spicata L. Mentha arvensis L. / M. aquatica Linn.: Aerial part of Pudina is taken in 5-10 g.
232. Mentha piperata L./ Mentha species Peppermint/Sat pudina: Peppermint/Sat pudina is taken in 10-30 mg.
233. Mesua ferrea Linn.: Nagkesar stamen/flower is consumed in 2-5 g.
234. Microstylis musifera Ridley: Jivaka tuber is taken in 5-10 g.
235. Microstylis wallichii Lindl. (Now known as Malaxis acuminate D. Don): Rishabhka tuber is consumed in 5-10 g.
236. Mimosa pudica: Lajwanti whole plant/seed is taken in 3-6 g.
237. Mimusops elengi L.: Maulsiri pericarp, flower, and stem bark are taken in 20-40 g, 5-10 g, and 3-5 g respectively.
238. Mimusops hexandra Roxb. (Now known as Manilkara hexandra (Roxb.) Dub.): Khirni pericarp is taken in 20-40 g.
239. Momordica charantia L.: Karela fresh fruit/seed is taken in 30-50 g and 3-5 g respectively.
240. Momordica dioica Roxb. ex Willd.: Khekhasa root and fruit are consumed in 3-6 g as powder and 30-50 g respectively.
241. Monochoria vaginalis (Burm.f.)Presl.: Indivara rhizome is consumed in 3-6 g.
242. Moringa oleifera Lam. / M.concanensis Nimmo: Sahijan leaf, seed, pod, flower, and stem bark are taken in 10-20 g as vegetable or paste, 2-6 g as vegetable, 40-80 g, 10-20 g, and 10-20 g respectively or 2-5 g as powder.
243. Morus alba L. / M. Indica / M.nigra: Shahtoot fruit, leaves, bark, and flower is taken in 20-30 g.
244. Moschella esculenta/M. elata: Guchhi plant is consumed in quantities of 10-30 g.
245. Mucuna pruriens (L.) DC.: Kawach root is taken in 10-20 g, Kawach pod in 20-30 g as vegetable, and Kawach seed in 5-10 g.
246. Murraya koenigii (L.) Spreng. / M. exotica Linn (kamini): Kadhipatta leaf and fruit are consumed in quantities of 5-10 g.
247. Musa paradisiaca L.: Kela flower is taken in 20-30 g, fresh shoot in 20-50 g or 10-20 ml as juice, ripe fruit in 100-200 g, and unripe fruit in 50-100 g.
248. Myrica esculenta Buch. Ham. / M. nagi Hook: Kaiphal fruit is consumed in 5-10 g, and Kaiphal stem bark in 2-3 g.
249. Myristica fragrans Houtt.: Jaiphala seed is taken in 0.25-1.0 g, and Javitri aril in 0.25-1 g as powder (excessive use may cause giddiness).
250. Myristica malabarica Lam.: Jangali Jayaphala seed is consumed in 0.5-2 g, and Jangali Javitri aril in 0.25-1 g.
251. Nardostachys jatamansi: Jatamansi is taken in 2-5 g.
252. Nasturtium officinale/ N. aquaticum: Water-cress is consumed in 20-40 g.
253. Nelumbo nucifera Gaertn.: Kamal flower is taken in 3-6 g as powder, Bhen rhizome in 30-50 g, Murar stalk in 30-50 g as powder, and Kamalgatta seed in 3-6 g as powder.
254. Nymphaea alba Linn/ N. rubra/ N. stellate: Kamlini rhizome, seed, and flower are consumed in 10-20 g and 3-6 g as flower respectively.
255. Nigella sativa L.: Kalaunji seed is taken in 5-10 g (not recommended during pregnancy).
256. Nyctanthes arbortristis L.: Harshringara flower is consumed in 1-2 g, and Harshringara leaf in 1-3 g.
257. Nymphaea rubra Roxb. ex Salisb: Lal Kumud flower is taken in 3-6 g as powder.
258. Nymphaea stellata Willd.: Neelofer flower is consumed in 3-6 g as powder.
259. Ocimum basilicum L.: Bhavari Tulsi leaf (Niajboo) is taken in 3-6 ml as juice, and 1-3 g as powder. Tulasi (Jangali) seed is taken in 125-250 mg.
260. Ocimum gratissimum L.: Ram Tulasi (Mumbai) leaf is consumed in 2-4 g as powder.
261. Ocimum sanctum L. (Now known as Ocimum tenuiflorum L.): Tulasi leaf is taken in 2-5 g, and Tulasi seed in 1-2 g.
262. Olea europaea: Jaitun seed/oil is consumed in 10-20 g/ml.
263. Onosma bracteatum: Gaujvan whole plant/leaf is taken in 5-10 g.
264. Onosma hispidum: Ratanjol root is consumed in 3-5 g.
265. Operculina turpethum: Nishoth root/seed is taken in 3-5 g (not recommended for children below 5 years).
266. Opuntia vulgaris / O. dillenii: Nagphani fruits are consumed in 10-20 g.
267. Orchis latifolia L. (Now known as Dactylorhiza hategeria (D. Don) Soo): Salampanja tuber is taken in 5-10 g as powder.
268. Origanum majorana L.: Marubaka leaf is consumed in 5-10 drops as juice.
269. Oroxylum indicum: Shyonok bark/seed is taken in 5-10 g.
270. Oryza sativa L.: Chawal - shali seed is consumed in 100-200 g as powder.
271. Oxalis corniculata L.: Tinpatia leaf is taken in 5-10 ml as juice.
272. Pandanus odoratissimus L.f.: Kewada oil/flower is consumed in 2-5 drops and 2-5 g respectively.
273. Panicum miliaceum L.: Cheen seed is taken in 50-100 g.
274. Papaver somniferum L. Seed known as Postadana is used in quantities of 2-5 g as powder.
275. Parmelia perlata, the whole plant called Chharila, is used in quantities of 3-5 g.
276. Paspalum scrobiculatum L., the seed or caryopsis known as Kodo, is used in quantities of 50-100 g.
277. Paspalum scrobiculatum, the fruit or seed known as Kodon, is used in quantities ranging from 30-500 g.
278. Pedalium murex, commonly referred to as Bada gokharu, is used in quantities of 5-10 g.
279. Pennisetum typhoideum L. C. Rich., now known as Pennisetum americanum (L.) K. Schum., the seed known as Bajra, is used in quantities of 20-40 g.
280. Peucedanum graveolens (L.) Benth. and Hook.f, the seed known as Shepu, is used in quantities of 1-3 g.
281. Phaseolus aconitifolius Jacq., now known as Vigna aconitifolia (Jacq.) Marechal, the seed known as Moth, is used in quantities of 20-50 g.
282. Phaseolus aureus Roxb., now known as Vigna radiata (L.) Wilczek var. radiata, the seed known as Jangali moong, is used in quantities of 20-50 g.
283. Phaseolus lunatus L., the pod known as Sem, is used in quantities of 25-50 g as pulse.
284. Phaseolus mungo L., now known as Vigna mungo (L.) Hepper, the seed known as Urad, is used in quantities of 20-50 g as pulse.
285. Phaseolus radiatus L. / P. trilobus sensu, the seed known as Moong, is used in quantities of 50-100 g as pulse.
286. Phaseolus vulgaris L., the pod known as Lobia, is used in quantities of 10-20 g as pulse.
287. Phoenix dactilifera L., the fruit known as Chuhara or Khajur, is used in quantities of 20-50 g.
288. Phoenix sylvestris (L.) Roxb. / P. acaulis, the fruit known as Khajoor, is used in quantities of 20-50 g, and its sap, Nira, is used in quantities of 30-50 ml as fresh juice.
289. Phyllanthus amarus / P. urinaria, the plant known as Tamlaki, is used in quantities of 5-10 g as plant and 1-2 g as extract.
290. Physalis alkekengi L., the fruit known as Kaknaj, is used in quantities of 5-10 g.
291. Physalis minima L., the fruit known as Papoto, is used in quantities of 10-20 g.
292. Physalis peruviana L., the fruit known as Rasbhari, is used in quantities of 10-20 g.
293. Pimpinella anisum L., the fruit known as Anisoon, is used in quantities of 1-3 g.
294. Pinus excelsa, the fruit or oil known as Kail, is used in quantities of 5-10 g or 1-2 ml, respectively, not recommended for children below 5 years.
295. Pinus gerardiana Wall., the endosperm known as Chilgoja, is used in quantities of 5-10 g.
296. Pinus roxburghii, the fruit or oil known as Chiia, is used in quantities of 5-10 g or 1-2 ml, respectively, not recommended for children below 5 years.
297. Piper betle L., the leaf known as Pana, is used in quantities of 2-5 g, not recommended below the age of 5 years.
298. Piper chaba Hunter (non Blume), now known as Piper retrofractum Vahl, the leaf known as Chabh, is used in quantities of 1-3 g as powder.
299. Piper cubeba L.f., the fruit known as Kabab chini, is used in quantities of 1-3 g as powder.
300. Piper longum L., the fruit known as Pipar, is used in quantities of 0.5-2 g as powder, not recommended for prolonged use.
301. Piper nigrum L., the fruit known as Kali Maricha, is used in quantities of 0.5-2 g.
302. Pistacia integerrima Stewart, now known as Pistacia chinensis Bunge ssp. Integerrima (Stewart) Rech.f., the gall known as Kakadasingi, is used in quantities of 1-2 g.
303. Pistacia vera L., the seed known as Pista, is used in quantities of 5-10 g.
304. Pisum sativum L., the seed known as Matar, is used in quantities of 50-150 g as vegetable.
305. Plantago ovata Forssk., the seed or husk known as Isabgol, is used in quantities of 5-10 g as vegetable.
306. Polygonatum cirrhifolium (Wall.) Royle, the rhizome known as Meda, is used in quantities of 5-10 g.
307. Polygonatum verticillatum (L.) All., the rhizome known as Mahameda, is used in quantities of 5-10 g.
308. Portulaca oleracea L., the aerial part known as Kulpha - sag, is used in quantities of 20-30 g as vegetable.
309. Portulaca quadrifida L., the aerial part known as Nonia - sag, is used in quantities of 20-30 g.
310. Premna integrifolia / P. latifolia, the whole plant or bark known as Agnimanth, is used in quantities of 5-10 g.
311. Prunus amygdalus Baill. var. dulchin, the kernel known as Badama, is used in quantities of 10-20 g, and its seed oil known as Badama ka tel is used in quantities of 3-5 ml.
312. Prunus armeniaca L., the pericarp or kernel known as Khumani, is used in quantities of 10-20 g for pericarp and 3-5 g for kernel, and its seed oil known as Khumani ka tel is used in quantities of 3-5 ml.
313. Prunus cerasoides, the wood or flower known as Padamkasht or Pajja, is used in quantities of 5-10 g.
314. Prunus persica (L.) Batsch., the pericarp known as Adu, is used in quantities of 10-20 g.
315. Psidium guajava L., the fruit known as Amruda, is used in quantities of 20-50 g as fresh fruit and 3-5 g as leaf.
316. Pterocarpus marsupium, the heartwood known as Vijaysar, is used in quantities of 5-10 g.
317. Pterocarpus santalinus, the heartwood known as Lal chandan, is used in quantities of 5-10 g.
318. Pueraria tuberosa (Roxb. ex Willd.) DC., the tuber known as Patal Kohda, is used in quantities of 10-20 g.
319. Punica granatum L., the seed known as Anar, is used in quantities of 20-50 g, and its fruit rind known as Anar ka chilka is used in quantities of 5-10 g.
320. Putranjiva roxburghii, the fruit known as Jiya-pota, is used in quantities of 3-6 g, not recommended for children below 5 years.
321. Pyrus communis L., the fruit known as Nashpaati, is used in quantities of 50-100 g.
322. Pyrus malus L., now known as Malus pumila Mill., the fruit known as Seb, is used in quantities of 100-200 g and 20-40 ml as juice.
323. Raphanus sativus L., the root, leaf, or seed known as Muli, is used in quantities of 20-50 g for root and leaf and 125-250 mg for seed.
324. Reinwardtia indica, the whole plant, leaf, or extract known as Basanti, is used in quantities of 5-10 g as powder and 0.5-1 g as extract.
325. Rhododendron arboreum Sm. / R. companulatum / R. lepidotum Wall., the flower or extract known as Buransa, is used in quantities of 20-30 g as flower and 2-3 g as extract.
326. Rheum emodi Wall. ex Meissn. / R. officinale, the leaf known as Revand chini, is used in quantities of 0.5-1 g.
