PART- 1 Preliminary

Regulation 1.3 General requirements:  
Regulation 1.3.1: Alcoholic beverages shall be free from chloral hydrate, ammonium chloride, paraldehyde, pyridine, diazepam or narcotic, psychotropic substances including caffeine except naturally-occurring caffeine.  
Regulation 1.3.2: The tolerance limit for ethyl alcohol content shall be ± 0.3 per cent (± 0.5 in case of wines) for upto 20 per cent, and ±1.0 per cent for more than 20 per cent abv of the declared strength.  
Regulation 1.3.3: Sugar may be added for rounding off of the alcoholic beverage.  
Regulation 1.3.4: The water used for dilution to bottling strength shall meet the requirements as specified in Indian Standards for Drinking Water, IS:10500 as amended from time to time.  
Regulation 1.3.5: Alcoholic beverage may contain additives, enzymes and processing aids as permitted under the Food Safety and Standards (Food Products Standards and Food Additives) Regulations, 2011.  
Regulation 1.3.6: Any alcoholic beverage when labelled as "matured”, shall be matured for a period of not less than one year in oak or other suitable wood vats or barrels or with wooden chips.  
Regulation 1.3.7: Where an age claim is made in conjunction with the word “aged”, the age must refer to the youngest spirit in the blend.  
Regulation 1.3.8: The test methods prescribed in the FSSAI “Manual of Methods of Analysis of Foods-Alcoholic Beverages” as amended from time to time shall be used for analysis.  
Regulation 1.3.9: Alcoholic beverage shall be packed in suitable containers as specified in the Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and Labelling) Regulations, 2011:  
Provided that bulk containers shall have no upper limit for alcohol content, and shall meet the safety parameters of the product standards. Such products shall also carry a label declaring, “For Manufacturer of Alcoholic Beverages only”.  
Alcoholic beverage containing not more than 8.0 per cent. abv may be called as low alcoholic beverage, and shall conform to the requirements of table 1 except for residue on evaporation.  

Regulation 1.4: The words and expressions used but not defined in these regulations shall have the same meaning assigned to them in the Act and the rules made thereunder.  

Part 2 Distilled Alcoholic Beverages

Regulation 2.1 Brandy:  
Brandy is an alcoholic beverage made by distillation of wine. Brandy may be aged or matured to possess aroma and taste characteristic of brandy. Brandy may be of the following types:  

Regulation 2.1.1 Grape brandy: Grape brandy shall be an alcoholic distillate obtained solely from the fermented juice of grapes. Distillation shall be carried out to a suitable strength in such a way that the distillate has an aroma and taste characteristics derived from the grapes used and the constituents formed during fermentation.  
In case of brandy made from any fruit other than grapes, the name of the fruit shall be pre-fixedwith the word ‘Brandy’.  

Regulation 2.1.2 Blended brandy: Blended brandy is a mixture of minimum 2 per cent. of pure grape brandy with any other fruit or flower brandy or neutral spirit or rectified spirit of agricultural origin. If any other fruit brandy is used for blending, the name of such fruit shall be pre-fixed with the word ‘Brandy’. It shall possess the characteristic aroma and taste of brandy.  
The Brandy shall also conform to the general requirement specified in Part 1 and requirements specified below:

1. Ethyl alcohol content at 20°C ranges from 36 to 50% by volume for Brandy or Grape Brandy, Brandy Blended, Country Liquor or Plain, Country Liquor Blended, Fenny, Gin, Liqueur or Cordial, Aperitif, Rum, White Rum, Vodka, Whisky Malt or Grain, Whisky Single Malt or Blended Whisky, Pot Distilled, Cashew Coconut Spirits.
2. Residue on evaporation is a maximum of 2.0% (m/v) for Brandy or Grape Brandy, Brandy Blended, Country Liquor or Plain, Country Liquor Blended, Fenny, Gin, Liqueur or Cordial, Aperitif, Rum, White Rum, Vodka, Whisky Malt or Grain, Whisky Single Malt or Blended Whisky, Pot Distilled, Cashew Coconut Spirits.
3. Volatile acids as acetic acid are a maximum of 100.0 g/100 l of absolute alcohol for Brandy or Grape Brandy, Brandy Blended, Country Liquor or Plain, Fenny, Gin, Liqueur or Cordial, Aperitif, Rum, Vodka, Whisky Malt or Grain, Whisky Single Malt or Blended Whisky, Pot Distilled, Cashew Coconut Spirits; 50.0 g/100 l for Country Liquor Blended; 200.0 g/100 l for Rum, White Rum.
4. Higher alcohols as amyl alcohol are a maximum of 600.0 g/100 l of absolute alcohol for Brandy or Grape Brandy; 350.0 g/100 l for Brandy Blended, Country Liquor or Plain, Country Liquor Blended, Gin, Liqueur or Cordial, Aperitif, Rum, White Rum, Vodka, Whisky Malt or Grain, Whisky Single Malt or Blended Whisky, Pot Distilled, Cashew Coconut Spirits; 250.0 g/100 l for Fenny; 750.0 g/100 l for Gin, Liqueur or Cordial, Aperitif.
5. Methyl alcohol (expressed as g/100 l of distilled absolute alcohol) is a maximum of 150.0 g/100 l for Brandy or Grape Brandy; 100.0 g/100 l for Brandy Blended, Country Liquor or Plain, Fenny, Gin, Liqueur or Cordial, Aperitif, Rum, Vodka, Whisky Malt or Grain, Whisky Single Malt or Blended Whisky, Pot Distilled, Cashew Coconut Spirits; absent for Country Liquor Blended.
6. Total esters as ethyl acetate (expressed as g/100 l of absolute alcohol) are a maximum of 350.0 g/100 l for Brandy or Grape Brandy; 250.0 g/100 l for Brandy Blended, Country Liquor or Plain, Fenny, Gin, Liqueur or Cordial, Aperitif, Rum, White Rum, Vodka, Whisky Malt or Grain, Whisky Single Malt or Blended Whisky, Pot Distilled, Cashew Coconut Spirits; 150.0 g/100 l for Country Liquor Blended.
7. Furfural (expressed as g/100 l of absolute alcohol) is a maximum of 12.0 g/100 l for Brandy or Grape Brandy, Brandy Blended, Country Liquor or Plain, Country Liquor Blended, Fenny, Gin, Liqueur or Cordial, Aperitif, Rum, White Rum, Vodka, Whisky Malt or Grain, Whisky Single Malt or Blended Whisky, Pot Distilled, Cashew Coconut Spirits; 5.0 g/100 l for Rum, White Rum; 2.0 g/100 l for Gin, Liqueur or Cordial, Aperitif.
8. Aldehydes as acetaldehyde (expressed as g/100 l of absolute alcohol) are a maximum of 45.0 g/100 l for Brandy or Grape Brandy, Brandy Blended, Country Liquor or Plain, Country Liquor Blended, Fenny, Gin, Liqueur or Cordial, Aperitif, Rum, White Rum, Vodka, Whisky Malt or Grain, Whisky Single Malt or Blended Whisky, Pot Distilled, Cashew Coconut Spirits; 35.0 g/100 l for Rum, White Rum; 10.0 g/100 l for Gin, Liqueur or Cordial, Aperitif.
9. Arsenic content is a maximum of 0.25 mg/l for all categories.
10. Cadmium content is a maximum of 0.01 mg/l for all categories.
11. Copper content is a maximum of 5.0 mg/l for all categories.
12. Lead content is a maximum of 0.2 mg/l for all categories.
13. Mercury content is a maximum of 0.25 mg/l for all categories.  

Regulation 2.2 Country liquors: 
Country liquors or spirits are alcoholic beverages obtained from distillation

 of fermented broth. Country liquors are either distilled alcoholic beverage made in wooden pot-still or column still. Country liquors are further categorised as Plain Country Liquor and Blended Country Liquor. The products shall conform to the general requirement specified in Part 1 and requirements specified in Table 1.  

Regulation 2.2.1: Plain Country Liquor is distilled alcoholic beverage made in wooden pot-still and/or column still from fermentation of molasses or from any carbohydrate of agricultural origin. The plain country liquor shall have the taste and characteristic aroma of the originating material.  

Regulation 2.2.2: Blended Country Liquor is a blend of 1.0 per cent of matured spirit of 3 years or more maturity with rectified spirit of agricultural origin, plain country liquor or neutral spirit, with or without caramel.  

Regulation 2.3 Fenny or Feni: 
Fenny or Feni is an alcoholic beverage made by distillation of fermented juice of cashew apple (Anacardium occidentale) or from coconut toddy. The products shall conform to the general requirement specified in Part 1 and requirements specified in Table – 1.  

Regulation 2.4 Gin: 
Gin is an alcoholic beverage made by distillation of a fermented mash of malt or grain and/or neutral alcohol of agricultural origin and/or in such a manner that the distillate is flavoured with juniper berries (Juniperus communis L.) and/or other aromatics and/or other flavouring substances.  
Gin may be of two types- Distilled Gin and London Gin. Gin shall also conform to the general requirement specified in Part 1 and the requirements specified below:

1. Ethyl alcohol content at 20°C ranges from 36 to 50% by volume for Brandy or Grape Brandy, Brandy Blended, Country Liquor or Plain, Country Liquor Blended, Fenny, Gin, Liqueur or Cordial, Aperitif, Rum, White Rum, Vodka, Whisky Malt or Grain, Whisky Single Malt or Blended Whisky, Pot Distilled, Cashew Coconut Spirits.
2. Residue on evaporation is a maximum of 2.0% (m/v) for Brandy or Grape Brandy, Brandy Blended, Country Liquor or Plain, Country Liquor Blended, Fenny, Gin, Liqueur or Cordial, Aperitif, Rum, White Rum, Vodka, Whisky Malt or Grain, Whisky Single Malt or Blended Whisky, Pot Distilled, Cashew Coconut Spirits.
3. Volatile acids as acetic acid are a maximum of 100.0 g/100 l of absolute alcohol for Brandy or Grape Brandy, Brandy Blended, Country Liquor or Plain, Fenny, Gin, Liqueur or Cordial, Aperitif, Rum, Vodka, Whisky Malt or Grain, Whisky Single Malt or Blended Whisky, Pot Distilled, Cashew Coconut Spirits; 50.0 g/100 l for Country Liquor Blended; 200.0 g/100 l for Rum, White Rum.
4. Higher alcohols as amyl alcohol are a maximum of 600.0 g/100 l of absolute alcohol for Brandy or Grape Brandy; 350.0 g/100 l for Brandy Blended, Country Liquor or Plain, Country Liquor Blended, Gin, Liqueur or Cordial, Aperitif, Rum, White Rum, Vodka, Whisky Malt or Grain, Whisky Single Malt or Blended Whisky, Pot Distilled, Cashew Coconut Spirits; 250.0 g/100 l for Fenny; 750.0 g/100 l for Gin, Liqueur or Cordial, Aperitif.
5. Methyl alcohol (expressed as g/100 l of distilled absolute alcohol) is a maximum of 150.0 g/100 l for Brandy or Grape Brandy; 100.0 g/100 l for Brandy Blended, Country Liquor or Plain, Fenny, Gin, Liqueur or Cordial, Aperitif, Rum, Vodka, Whisky Malt or Grain, Whisky Single Malt or Blended Whisky, Pot Distilled, Cashew Coconut Spirits; absent for Country Liquor Blended.
6. Total esters as ethyl acetate (expressed as g/100 l of absolute alcohol) are a maximum of 350.0 g/100 l for Brandy or Grape Brandy; 250.0 g/100 l for Brandy Blended, Country Liquor or Plain, Fenny, Gin, Liqueur or Cordial, Aperitif, Rum, White Rum, Vodka, Whisky Malt or Grain, Whisky Single Malt or Blended Whisky, Pot Distilled, Cashew Coconut Spirits; 150.0 g/100 l for Country Liquor Blended.
7. Furfural (expressed as g/100 l of absolute alcohol) is a maximum of 12.0 g/100 l for Brandy or Grape Brandy, Brandy Blended, Country Liquor or Plain, Country Liquor Blended, Fenny, Gin, Liqueur or Cordial, Aperitif, Rum, White Rum, Vodka, Whisky Malt or Grain, Whisky Single Malt or Blended Whisky, Pot Distilled, Cashew Coconut Spirits; 5.0 g/100 l for Rum, White Rum; 2.0 g/100 l for Gin, Liqueur or Cordial, Aperitif.
8. Aldehydes as acetaldehyde (expressed as g/100 l of absolute alcohol) are a maximum of 45.0 g/100 l for Brandy or Grape Brandy, Brandy Blended, Country Liquor or Plain, Country Liquor Blended, Fenny, Gin, Liqueur or Cordial, Aperitif, Rum, White Rum, Vodka, Whisky Malt or Grain, Whisky Single Malt or Blended Whisky, Pot Distilled, Cashew Coconut Spirits; 35.0 g/100 l for Rum, White Rum; 10.0 g/100 l for Gin, Liqueur or Cordial, Aperitif.
9. Arsenic content is a maximum of 0.25 mg/l for all categories.
10. Cadmium content is a maximum of 0.01 mg/l for all categories.
11. Copper content is a maximum of 5.0 mg/l for all categories.
12. Lead content is a maximum of 0.2 mg/l for all categories.
13. Mercury content is a maximum of 0.25 mg/l for all categories.

  

Regulation 2.4.1 Distilled gin: Distilled gin shall be produced by redistilling ethanol of agricultural origin with an initial strength of minimum 96 percent abv in the presence of juniper berries (Juniperus communis L.) and other natural botanicals, where the juniper taste is predominant.  

Regulation 2.4.2 London gin: London gin is a type of distilled gin and shall be produced exclusively from ethanol of agricultural origin with a maximum methanol content of 5 grams per hectolitre of 100 percent abv equivalent, whose flavour is introduced exclusively through the redistillation in traditional stills of ethanol in the presence of all the natural plant materials used.  

Regulation 2.5 Rum: 
Rum is an alcoholic distillate from the fermented juice of sugarcane, sugarcane syrup, sugarcane molasses or other sugarcane by-products, and shall possess the characteristic aroma and taste of rum. It shall be of two types, plain and matured rum. Rum shall also conform to the general requirement specified in Part 1 and the requirements specified in Table – 1.  

Regulation 2.5.1 Plain rum: Plain rum is an alcoholic beverage made from the distillate of fermented molasses with or without caramel.  

Regulation 2.5.2 Matured rum: Matured rum is rum aged for not less than one year in oak or other suitable wooden cask and with or without the addition of caramel.  

Regulation 2.6 Vodka:  
Vodka is a potable alcoholic beverage made from rectified spirit or neutral alcohol of agricultural origin with or without characteristic taste, aroma and flavour. It shall be of the following two types: Plain Vodka and Flavoured Vodka. It shall also conform to the general requirements specified in Part 1 and the requirements specified in Table – 1.  

Regulation 2.6.1 Plain Vodka: Plain Vodka is a colourless neutral alcoholic beverage without definite aroma or taste, and free from flavouring substances except permitted additives.  

Regulation 2.6.2 Flavoured Vodka: Flavoured Vodka is a potable alcoholic beverage made from plain vodka with natural flavouring substances conforming to the requirements of the Food Safety and Standards (Food Products Standards and Food Additives) Regulations, 2011.  

Regulation 2.7 Liqueur or Cordial or Aperitifs:  
Liqueur or Cordial or Aperitifs are potable alcoholic beverages made from distilled spirit or neutral alcohol of agricultural origin, flavoured with natural ingredients like fruit juices, fruit peels, herbs, spices, and other plant materials, with or without the addition of sugar, dextrose, laevulose, or other natural sweeteners. These products shall conform to the general requirements specified in Part 1 and the requirements specified in Table 1.  

Regulation 2.8 Whisky:  
Whisky is an alcoholic distillate obtained from the fermented mash of malted and/or unmalted cereals or grains with or without added flavouring, and aged in oak or other suitable wooden casks for a period of not less than one year. The whisky shall possess the characteristic aroma and taste of whisky. It shall also conform to the general requirements specified in Part 1 and the requirements specified in Table – 1.  

Part 3 Wine and Other Fermented Beverages

Regulation 3.1 Wine:  
Wine is the alcoholic beverage obtained by fermentation of freshly crushed grapes or fruit juices or concentrates. It includes Table Wine, Sparkling Wine, Fortified Wine, and Aromatized Wine. It shall conform to the general requirements specified in Part 1 and the requirements specified below:
1. Ethyl alcohol content at 20°C ranges from 7.0 to 15.5% by volume for Table or Grape Wine, Wine with carbon dioxide, Fortified Wine, and Fruit Wine (other than grape wine). For Cider, Perry, and Wine from other Agricultural and Plant Sources, it varies from more than 0.5 to 9.0%.
2. The maximum residual extract (sugar free) is 50.0 g/l for all types of wines and beverages.
3. Volatile acids as acetic acid are limited to a maximum of 1.2 g/l for all types of wines and beverages.
4. Higher alcohols expressed as amyl alcohol are capped at 4.0 g/l of absolute alcohol for Table or Grape Wine, Wine with carbon dioxide, Fortified Wine, and Fruit Wine (other than grape wine). For Cider and Perry, it is 2.0 g/l.
5. Total acids expressed as tartaric acid have a maximum limit of 10.0 g/l of wine for all types.
6. Methyl alcohol content is restricted to a maximum of 250 mg/l of wine for Table Wine, Wine with carbon dioxide, and Cider. For other types, it is 400 mg/l.
7. Esters expressed as ethyl acetate should not exceed 4.0 g/l of absolute alcohol for Table or Grape Wine, Wine with carbon dioxide, Fortified Wine, and Fruit Wine (other than grape wine). It is limited to 0.2 g/l for Cider, Perry, and Wine from other Agricultural and Plant Sources.
8. Aldehydes expressed as acetaldehyde should not exceed 1.0 g/l of absolute alcohol for all types of wines and beverages.
9. The maximum limit for arsenic content is 0.25 mg/l for all types of wines and beverages.
10. Cadmium content should not exceed 0.01 mg/l for all types of wines and beverages.
11. Copper content is limited to a maximum of 5.0 mg/l for all types of wines and beverage
12. Iron (as Fe) content should not exceed 5.0 mg/l for all types of wines and beverages.
13. Lead content is limited to a maximum of 0.2 mg/l for all types of wines and beverages.
14. Ochratoxin A content should not exceed 20 µg/l for Table or Grape Wine, Wine with carbon dioxide, Fortified Wine, and Fruit Wine (other than grape wine). For Cider, Perry, and Wine from other Agricultural and Plant Sources, the limit is 2 µg/l.  

Regulation 3.2 Fruit Wine:  
Fruit Wine is an alcoholic beverage obtained by fermentation of the juice of fruit other than grapes. It includes Cider, Perry, and other similar beverages. It shall conform to the general requirements specified in Part 1 and the requirements specified in Table – 2.  

Regulation 3.3 Wine from Other Agricultural and Plant Sources: 
This includes wines made from sources such as palm sap, bamboo sap, and other plant materials. It shall conform to the general requirements specified in Part 1 and the requirements specified in Table – 2.  

Part 4 Beer

Regulation 4.1 Beer:  
Beer is a fermented alcoholic beverage made from malted barley and other cereal grains, hops, and water. Beer may be of different types based on alcohol content and fermentation process, including Lager, Ale, Stout, Porter, and Wheat Beer. It shall conform to the general requirements specified in Part 1 and the requirements specified below.  
1. Ethyl alcohol content at 20°C varies from more than 0.5% up to 5.0% by volume for Beer and Regular Draught Beer, and from more than 5.0% up to 8.0% for Strong Beer and Strong Draught Beer.
2. pH levels range from 3.3 to 4.8 for both Beer and Draught Beer across all types.
3. Carbon dioxide content ranges from 1.8 to 3.6 volumes/volume (v/v) for Beer and Draught Beer in both Regular and Strong varieties.
4. Methyl alcohol content is capped at a maximum of 50.0 mg/l for all types of Beer and Draught Beer.
5. Copper content should not exceed 2.0 mg/l in both Beer and Draught Beer, whether Regular or Strong.
6. Iron (as Fe) content should not exceed 5.0 mg/l in both Beer and Draught Beer, irrespective of the type.
7. Lead content is limited to a maximum of 0.2 mg/l in both Beer and Draught Beer, across all varieties.
8. Arsenic content should not exceed 0.25 mg/l in both Beer and Draught Beer, for all types.
9. Cadmium content is capped at a maximum of 0.1 mg/l in both Beer and Draught Beer, whether Regular or Strong.
10. Total plate count should be less than 10 colony-forming units (cfu) per ml for Beer and Draught Beer, and less than 100 cfu/ml for Strong Beer and Strong Draught Beer.
11. Coliform count should be absent in all types of Beer and Draught Beer.
12. Yeast count should be absent in Beer and Regular Draught Beer, and less than 40 cfu/ml in Strong Draught Beer.

Regulation 4.2 Draught Beer: 
Draught Beer is beer served from a pressurised keg or cask and is typically unpasteurised. It shall conform to the general requirements specified in Part 1 and the requirements specified in 4.1.  

Part 5 Specific Labelling Requirements

5.1 Declaration of alcohol content:
a. Alcohol content must be expressed as percent ABV (alcohol by volume) or as proof.

5.2 Labeling of standard drink:
a. One standard drink equals 12.7 ml of ABV measured at 20°C. The label may also indicate the approximate number of standard drinks in the package.

5.3 Geographical indicators:
a. Geographical indicators or names may be used on the label solely for products originating from that geographical region.

5.4 Imported alcoholic beverages:
a. For imported alcoholic beverages, comply with the Food Safety and Standards (Import) Regulations, 2017.

5.5 Nutritional information:
a. Alcoholic beverages shall not contain any nutritional information on the label.

5.6 Health claims:
a. No health claim shall be made on alcoholic beverages.

5.7 Use of certain words:
a. The label of alcoholic beverages with more than 0.5% ABV shall not use the words 'non-intoxicating' or similar words implying non-intoxicating properties.

5.8 Representation of alcohol-containing foods:
a. Food containing alcohol must not be represented as non-alcoholic confections or beverages.

5.9 Labeling of wine:
a. In addition to requirements 5.1 to 5.6, wine labels must:
b. Indicate the origin (country or state) and declare the amount of sugar.
c. List the name of the grape or fruit variety used in descending order if claimed.
d. Declare the names of residues of preservatives or additives present in the final product.

5.10 Labeling of alcoholic beverages other than wine (less than 10% alcohol):
a. Must mention the expiry date in the format "Expiry date ____" or "Use by ____". "Best before" may also be used optionally.

5.11 Allergen warning:
a. If wine contains more than 10 mg sulfur dioxide per liter, label must declare "Contains sulfur dioxide" or "Contains sulfite".
b. If egg white or isinglass (of animal origin) is used as fining or clarifying agent and residues are present, it must be declared with a non-vegetarian logo.

5.12 Statutory warning:
a. Must include the statutory warning in English: "CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL IS INJURIOUS TO HEALTH. BE SAFE - DON'T DRINK AND DRIVE." If states prefer, it can also be printed in local or regional languages without repeating the English version. The size of the warning must be at least 3 mm.

5.13 requirements for low alcoholic beverages other than wine and beer:

1. Ethyl alcohol content at 20 degrees Celsius must be greater than 0.5% and up to 8.0% by volume.
2. Residue on evaporation should not exceed 25.0% (m/v).
3. Total acids as tartaric acid should not exceed 1.0% (m/v).
4. Methyl alcohol content, expressed as grams per 100 liters of absolute alcohol, should not exceed 25.0.
5. Sugar content should not exceed 20.0% (w/v).
6. pH level should range from 2.0 to 5.0.
7. Copper content should not exceed 1.0 mg/l.
8. Iron content (as Fe) should not exceed 5.0 mg/l.
9. Lead content should not exceed 0.2 mg/l.
10. Arsenic content should not exceed 0.25 mg/l.
11. Cadmium content should not exceed 0.1 mg/l.