3. General Requirements.- (1) Every food business operator shall ensure that the packaging material used shall be in
accordance with these regulations:
 Provided where Indian Standards are not available, then relevant International Standards may be complied with.
(2) Any material which comes in direct contact with food or likely to come in contact with food used for packaging,
preparation, storing, wrapping, transportation and sale or service of food shall be of food grade quality.
(3) Packaging materials shall be suitable for the type of product, the conditions provided for storage and the equipment for
filling, sealing and packaging of food as well as transportation conditions.
(4) Packaging materials shall be able to withstand mechanical, chemical or thermal stresses encountered during normal
transportation. In case of flexible or semi-rigid containers, an overwrap packaging may be necessary.
(5) Food products shall be packed in clean, hygienic and tamper-proof package or container. 
(6) The sealing material shall be compatible with the product and the containers as well as the closure systems used for
the containers.
(7) Tin containers once used, shall not be re-used for packaging of food.
(8) Plastic containers of capacity 5 litre and above and Glass bottles, which are reused for packaging of food, shall be
suitably durable, easy to clean or disinfect.
(9) Printing inks for use on food packages shall conform to IS: 15495.
(10) Printed surface of packaging material shall not come into direct contact with food products.
(11) Newspaper or any such material shall not be used for storing and wrapping of food.
(12) In case of multilayer packaging the layer which comes in direct contact with food or layers likely to come in contact
with food shall meet the requirements of packaging materials specified in Schedule I, II and III of these regulations.
(13) The materials listed in Schedule I, II and III of these regulations shall be compatible with their intended use as a
packaging material so as not to alter the quality and safety of the food product.
(14) Every food business operator shall obtain the certificate of conformity issued by NABL accredited laboratory
against these regulations for the packaging material which comes in direct contact with food or layers likely to come in
contact with food to be used.
4. Specific Requirements for Primary food packaging.- (1) Paper and board materials intended to come in contact
with food products-
(a) Paper and board material shall be of uniform formation, thickness and substance.
 (b) It shall be free from visible specks, grease marks, cuts, pinholes and other blemishes.
 (c) The paper used for the manufacture of boxes, cartons, plates, cups and paper lids or paper which are meant to be
direct in contact with food shall be of food grade and shall be free from contaminants.
 (d) Paper and board materials used for the manufacturing of containers for packing or storing the food products shall
conform to either of the Indian Standards specifications as provided in Schedule – I.
(2) Glass containers intended to come in contact with food products- (a) As far as possible, they shall be free from
blisters, mould marks, stones and chippings and as far as possible shall be free from cords, seeds and other visible
defects.
(b) They shall have a smooth surface without cracks, pinholes and sharp edges.
(c) The sealing surface shall be free from hairline cracks and prominent seam marks.
(3) Metal and Metal Alloys intended to come in contact with food products-
(a) A utensil or container made of the following materials or metals, when used in the preparation, packaging and storing
of food shall be deemed to render it unfit for human consumption:-
(i) containers which are rusty;
(ii) enamelled containers which have become chipped and rusty;
(iii) copper or brass containers which are not properly tinned.
(b) Appropriate grades of metal and metal alloys where applicable shall be used for packing or storing of food products.
(c) Metal and metal alloys used for the manufacturing of containers for packing or storing the food products shall conform
to either of the Indian Standards specifications as provided in Schedule – II.
(4) Plastic materials intended to come in contact with food products-
 (a) Plastic materials used for the manufacturing of containers for packing or storing the food products shall conform to
either of the Indian Standards specifications as provided in Schedule – III:
Provided that Drinking Water (both Packaged and Mineral Water) shall be packed in colourless, transparent and
tamper-proof bottles or containers made of polyethylene (PE) conforming to IS: 10146 or polyvinyl chloride (PVC)
conforming to IS: 10151 or polyalkylene terephthalate (PET and PBT) conforming to IS: 12252 or polypropylene (PP)
conforming to IS: 10910 or food grade polycarbonate conforming to IS: 14971 or polystyrene conforming to IS: 10142 or
sterile glass bottles only. The transparency of a container shall not be less than 85 percent in light transmittance:
Provided also that all pigments or colorants as specified in Indian Standard IS: 9833 may be allowed in plastic
containers of five litre and above made of Polycarbonate and Polyethylene Terephthalate (PET) used for packaging of
mineral water and packaged drinking water. The transparency of such containers shall not be less than 85 percent in light
transmittance.
(b) All packaging materials of plastic origin shall pass the prescribed overall migration limit of 60mg/kg or 10mg/dm2
when tested as per IS 9845 with no visible colour migration.
(c) Plastic materials and articles shall not release the substances in quantities exceeding the specific migration limits listed
under Table 1.
(d) Pigments or Colorants for use in plastics in contact with food products and drinking water shall conform to IS: 9833.
(e) Products made of recycled plastics including carry bags shall not be used for packaging, storing, carrying or dispensing
articles of food.
Table 1
Requirement for specific migration limits of substances from plastic materials intended to be in contact with articles of food:
Barium has a maximum migration limit of 1.0 mg/kg. Cobalt has a maximum migration limit of 0.05 mg/kg. Copper has a maximum migration limit of 5.0 mg/kg. Iron has a maximum migration limit of 48.0 mg/kg. Lithium has a maximum migration limit of 0.6 mg/kg. Manganese has a maximum migration limit of 0.6 mg/kg. Zinc has a maximum migration limit of 25.0 mg/kg.
5. A list of suggestive packaging materials which may be used for packaging of food products falling under the specified
categories is provided in Schedule – IV:
 Provided that this is an indicative list not restricting the use of any other packaging material complying with the
specified standards.
Schedule – I
Paper and board materials intended to come in contact with food products
The list of standards includes:
Grease proof paper as per IS 6622. Vegetable parchment or Grease proof paper or Aluminium Foil Laminate as per IS 7161. Aluminium Foil Laminates for Packaging as per IS 8970. General purpose packing or wrapping Paper as per IS 6615. Folding Box Board, uncoated as per IS 1776. Corrugated Fibre Board Boxes- Specification (Part 1) as per IS 2771.
Schedule – II
Metal and Metal Alloys intended to come in contact with food products
The list of standards includes:
Cold-reduced Electrolytic Tinplate as per IS 1993/ISO 11949. Cold reduced Electrolytic Chromium or Chromium Oxide – Coated Steel as per IS 12591/ISO 11950. Wrought Aluminium and Aluminium Alloy Sheet and Strip for General Engineering as per IS 737. Aluminium and Aluminium Alloy Bare Foil for Food Packaging as per IS 15392. Specification for Crown Closures as per IS 1994. Specification for Round Open Top Sanitary Cans for Foods and Drinks as per IS 9396 (Part 1). Specification for Round Open Top Sanitary Cans for Foods and Drinks as per IS 9396 (Part 2).
Schedule – III
Plastic Materials intended to come in contact with food products 
The list of standards includes:
Specification for Polyethylene for its safe use in contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals, and drinking water as per IS 10146. Specification for Polystyrene for its safe use in contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals, and drinking water as per IS 10142. Specification for Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) and its copolymers for its safe use in contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals, and drinking water as per IS 10151. Specification for Polypropylene and its copolymers for its safe use in contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals, and drinking water as per IS 10910. Specification for Ionomer Resins for its safe use in contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals, and drinking water as per IS 11434. Specification for Ethylene Acrylic Acid (EAA) copolymers for their safe use in contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals, and drinking water as per IS 11704. Specification for Polyalkylene Terephathalates (PET & PBT) for their safe use in contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals, and drinking water as per IS 12252. Specification for Nylon 6 Polymer for its safe use in contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals, and drinking water as per IS 12247. Specification for Ethylene Vinyl Acetate (EVA) copolymers for its safe use in contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals, and drinking water as per IS 13601. Specification for Ethylene Metha Acrylic Acid (EMAA) copolymers and terpolymers for its safe use in contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals, and drinking water as per IS 13576. Specification for Polycarbonate Resins for its safe use in contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals, and drinking water as per IS 14971. Specification for Flexible Packaging Materials for packaging of Edible Oils, Ghee, and Vanaspati as per IS 14636. Specification for Polyalkylene Terephthalates (PET & PBT) for Moulding and Extrusion as per IS 13193. Specification for Polyethylene Films and Sheets as per IS 2508. Specification for Linear Low Density Polyethylene (LLDPE) Films as per IS 14500. Specification for High Density Polyethylene Materials for Moulding and Extrusion as per IS 7328. Specification for Melamine-Formaldehyde Resins for its safe use in contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals, and drinking water as per IS 14999. Low Density Polyethylene Films as per IS 2508. Blow Moulded Polyolefin Containers - Part 2: Over 5 Litres, Up to and Including 60 Litres Capacity as per IS 7408. Stretch Cling Films as per IS 14995.
Schedule – IV
List of suggestive packaging materials
For milk and milk products, packaging materials include glass bottles with metal caps or plastic caps made of polypropylene (PP) or high-density polyethylene (HDPE), rigid plastic containers made of PET with plastic caps, rigid plastic containers made of HDPE, PP, or polystyrene (PS) with plastic caps, flexible plastic pouches made of polyethylene (PE) or polypropylene (PP) based co-extruded multilayered material, aseptic and flexible packaging materials based on paper board, aluminium foil, or polyethylene in multilayered structures, tin plate containers, paper-based lined cartons with aluminium foil-based laminated structures, plastic-based cups made of PP or PS with paper or peel-off lids, wax-coated paper butter wrappers, paper and paperboard-based folding cartons with butter paper, metal containers with plastic PP caps or metal or plastic lids, plastic PET containers with plastic lids, thermoformed cups or trays with paper or peel-off lids, paper and paperboard setup boxes with or without lamination or grease-proof paper, plastic-based multilayered flexible laminated heat-sealed pouches, mud or clay pots, and thermoformed plastic containers (blister packs) with aluminium foil or PE-based lids.

For fats, oils, and fat emulsions, packaging materials include tin plate containers, glass bottles with metal caps or plastic PP or HDPE caps, plastic rigid containers (jars) made of HDPE, plastic bottles or jars made of PET with plastic caps, plastic pouches made of multilayered laminated or co-extruded structures, aseptic and flexible packaging materials based on paper board, aluminium foil, or polyethylene in multilayered structures, plastic laminated pouches in duplex board boxes (bag in box), thermoformed plastic-based jars with plastic caps, and paper-based lined cartons with aluminium foil-based laminated structures.

For fruit and vegetable products, packaging materials include glass bottles with metal caps or plastic caps made of PP or HDPE, aluminium cans with easy-open ends, tinplate containers, aseptic and flexible packaging materials based on paper board, aluminium foil, or polyethylene in multilayered structures, plastic rigid containers (jars) made of HDPE or co-extruded structures with plastic caps, stand-up pouches made of plastic-based structures with plastic spouts, flexible plastic pouches made of either polyethylene (PE) or laminated structures, thermoformed plastic containers (blister packs) with aluminium foil or PE-based lids, plastic jars (co-extruded) with metal caps, plastic trays with overwraps, and punnets made of PET, PP, or PVC.

For sweets and confectionery, packaging materials include metal containers with plastic PP caps or metal or plastic lids, plastic-based multilayered laminated heat-sealed pouches, composite containers made of paperboard, aluminium foil, or plastic base films with plastic or metal lids, plastic-based rigid containers, foil wraps, plastic film-based twist wraps made of PET, PP, or PVC, thermoformed trays and punnets with lids, glass bottles with metal or plastic caps, and plastic cups with film lids.

For cereals and cereal products, packaging materials include tin containers, aluminium foil-based laminated pouches in metal containers, wrappers made of wax-coated paper, wrappers made of three-layered laminated structures, plastic-based multilayered laminated pouches (heat sealed), and plastic-based thermoform containers with plastic lids.Lined carton with liner made of multi layered laminated structure. Plastic based multilayered laminated structured Zipper pouch. Thermoform trays with plastic lids or over wraps. Glass bottle with metal caps. Polyethylene terephthalate (PET) or Plastic based rigid containers with metal or plastic ( polypropylene (PP) or High-density polyethylene (HDPE) caps. Plastic films or co-extruded film or polypropylene (PP) or polyethylene (PE)
For meat and meat products or poultry products, packaging materials include glass jars with plastic caps made of polypropylene (PP) or high-density polyethylene (HDPE), metal containers with metal lids (lacquered tin containers), plastic-based flexible pouches in paper and paperboard cartons, plastic-based multilayered flexible laminated heat-sealed pouches, plastic trays with overwraps, aluminium foil wraps, and polyethylene terephthalate (PET) punnets or containers with plastic caps.

For fish and fish products or seafood, packaging materials include glass jars with plastic caps made of PP or HDPE, metal containers with metal lids (lacquered tin containers), PET punnets or containers with plastic caps, plastic-based multilayered flexible laminated heat-sealed pouches, and plastic trays with overwraps.

For sweetening agents including honey, packaging materials include glass bottles with metal caps or plastic caps made of PP or HDPE, plastic-based thermoformed containers, blister packs with foil or polyethylene lids, PET containers with plastic caps, and plastic laminated tubes.

For salt, spices, condiments, and related products, packaging materials include glass bottles with metal lids or plastic caps made of PP or HDPE, plastic-based rigid containers with plastic caps (PET and HDPE containers), paper and paperboard or aluminium foil or plastic film-based composite containers, folding cartons with plastic-based flexible laminated structures (heat-sealed) pouches placed inside, and plastic-based multilayered laminated heat-sealed pouches.

For beverages (other than dairy and fruits & vegetables based), packaging materials include plastic bottles made of either PET or polycarbonate (PC) with plastic caps made of PP or HDPE or aluminium caps, heat-sealed plastic pouches made of polyethylene (PE), glass bottles with metal or plastic caps, plastic pouches made of PE in corrugated fibreboard boxes, aluminium cans with easy-open ends, tin plate containers, plastic pouches made of laminated structures, aseptic and flexible packaging materials based on paperboard, aluminium foil, or polyethylene in multilayered structures, plastic-based multilayered heat-sealed pouches, plastic-based multilayered heat-sealed zipper pouches or stand-up pouches, metal containers with plastic or PP caps or metal or plastic lids, rigid plastic containers with plastic caps (PP caps), and wooden casks for wines.