MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
(FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARDS AUTHORITY OF INDIA)
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the 26th July, 2019
F. No. REG/11/27/ Surplus Food/FSSAI-2017.— Whereas the draft of the Food Safety and Standards
(Recovery and Distribution of Surplus Food) Regulations, 2019 were published as required by section 92 of the Food
Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (34 of 2006), vide notification of the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India
number No. REG/11/27/ Surplus Food/FSSAI-2017, dated 4th February, 2019, in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary,
Part III, Section 4, dated 11th February, 2019, inviting objections and suggestions from the persons likely to be affected
thereby, before the expiry of the period of thirty days from the date on which the copies of the Official Gazette
containing the said notification were made available to the public;
 And Whereas, the copies of the said Gazette were made available to the public on the 11th February, 2019;
 And Whereas the objections and suggestions received from the public in respect of the said draft regulations
have been considered by the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India;
 Now, Therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by clause (v) of sub-section (2) of section 92 of the said
Act and with the previous approval of the Central Government, the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India hereby
makes the following regulations, namely:-
REGULATIONS
CHAPTER I
GENERAL
1. Short title and commencement.- (1) These regulations may be called the Food Safety and Standards (Recovery and
Distribution of Surplus Food) Regulations, 2019.
(2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette and Food Business Operator shall
comply with all the provisions of these regulations by 1st July, 2020.
2. Definitions. – (1) In these regulations, unless the context otherwise requires,--
(a) “Act” means the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (34 of 2006);
(b) “food donor” means any person or food business operator who donates surplus food;
(c) “Schedule” means a schedule annexed to these regulations;
(d) “surplus food” means any leftover unused portions of safe food that have not been served to the customers;
(e) “surplus food distribution organisation” means any person or any organisation that collects surplus food from food
donor and distributes directly to any person free of cost without any profit.
(2) All other words and expressions used herein and not defined, but defined in the Act, rules or regulations made
thereunder, shall have the meanings assigned to them in the Act, rules or regulations, respectively.
3. Scope.- These regulations specify the responsibility of the food donor and surplus food distribution organisations those
who are engaged in distributing the surplus food to any person free of cost. 
4. Responsibilities of food business operator. – (1) Any food donor having surplus food may donate such food to any
surplus food distribution organisation in accordance with the provisions of these regulations.
(2) The surplus food shall be maintained in accordance with the requirements specified in Schedule–I.
(3) The food business operator shall not distribute unsafe food to any surplus food distribution organisation.
(4) The surplus food shall be handed over to surplus food distribution organisation at a reasonable time before it gets
spoiled or its expiry, as the case may be, so that the food is made available to needy persons for consumption within the
shelf life of the food.
 5. Responsibilities of surplus food distribution organisation. - (1) Surplus food distribution organisation which is
serving food to needy person shall be regulated in accordance with the provisions of the Food Safety and Standards
(Licensing and Registration of Food Business) Regulations, 2011 and such foods shall be obtained from reliable sources
having valid registration or license in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
(2) The surplus food distribution organisation shall have proper facilities for transport, storage and reheating, and shall
comply with the requirements specified in Schedule-I.
(3) No surplus food distribution organisation shall distribute surplus food after the expiry of its shelf life.
6. Labeling requirements of donated foods.- (1) The requirements for labeling of donated food depends on whether the
food is in its original package or has been prepared as meal.
(2) Donated pre-packed food shall bear its complete original label, including name of the item or food, manufacturer
information, list of ingredients, and date of expiry.
(3) Donated prepared food shall be labeled with the name of the food, the source of the food, the date of preparation and
last date of consumption and also specify whether the food is vegetarian or non-vegetarian.
(4) The information on the label shall not be masked in any manner.
7. Maintenance of record of surplus food.- The food donor and surplus food distribution organisation shall maintain
the record of surplus food as specified in Schedule-II.
8. Monitoring Committee.- The Commissioner of Food Safety of the State or, as the case may be, the Union territory
shall constitute a monitoring committee for surplus food at State level consisting of two members from State enforcement
agency, one representative from Department of Consumer Affairs of the respective State, one member from nongovernmental organisation , one representative from surplus food distribution organisation and one representative from
industry association and other relevant stakeholders.
9. Functions of monitoring committee.- (1) The monitoring committee shall monitor and make recommendations on
the improvement of the operations by the surplus food distribution organisation and food donors.
 (2) The monitoring committee may also conduct training programs in health and hygiene for the food handler of
food distribution organisation and also make recommendations on issues arising from implementation of the provisions
of these regulations.
10. Guidance and support by Food Authority.- (1) The Food Authority may issue guidelines on collection and
retrieval of food, which is near to their expiry, for donation and provide guidance to support the operations of food
business operators covered under these regulations.
 (2) The Food Authority may also specify the time before the expiry, at which food shall be segregated.
Schedule-I
(see regulation 4 and 5)
1. Handling of surplus food by the food business operator. – (1) Surplus foods that are to be handed over to food
distribution organisation shall be safe and segregated in to perishable and non-perishable. 
(2) The segregated food shall be packed appropriately so as to avoid contamination during handling and storage.
(3) Perishable and non-perishable surplus food shall be stored in hygienic condition at optimum temperature to ensure
their safety.
(4) Surplus food shall not be kept with any waste material or products.
(5) The food donor shall give an advance notice to the surplus food distribution organisation so as to ensure a timely
distribution and consumption of the food within its shelf life.
2. Handling and distribution of surplus food by the surplus food distribution organisation. -
(1) Surplus food shall be picked up from the food business operator’s facility and packed in clean and covered containers.
Such food containers shall have the required date marking such as pick-up date and the use by date of food.
(2) Surplus food shall be stored and transported in clean and sanitized vehicles in appropriate hygienic condition at
appropriate optimum temperature suitable for perishable and non-perishable food separately. Insulated containers and ice
packs, if necessary, may be used to maintain food temperature during handling and transportation. Food transport
equipment/ utensils that are intended to be in direct contact with food products should be constructed with non-toxic,
food grade materials, which shall also be easy to clean and maintain.
(3) Surplus food shall be distributed or served to the needy before the expiry of surplus food or until food is fit for human
consumption, as the case may be.
(4) Food that is not fit for human consumption shall be put in a container clearly marked as “Food for Disposal”.
(5) Food shall be stored off the floor and away from walls and non-food items. storage area, including the floor, pallets
and shelves shall be cleaned regularly.
(6) Where refrigerator is used for storage of surplus food, these shall be cleaned at least once a week to remove stains, ice
particles and food particles. The temperature in the refrigerator shall be maintained below 7oC.
(7) Doors, windows and roofs of storage area shall be well sealed to prevent pest entry and a pest control program shall
be in place for such areas.
(8) All employees or volunteers that work with distribution organisation and come in direct contact with food shall keep
their finger nails trimmed and shall wear clean outer garments and wash their hands before starting work, and as often as
necessary, especially after eating handling or using the washroom, etc.
(9) Avoid eating food, drinking beverages, or using tobacco in any form in areas where food is exposed, or in areas used
for washing equipment or utensils shall be avoided.
(10) No person shall come in contact with food during any illness that is communicable through food. Cuts, boils and
wounds shall be covered.
(11) All employees or volunteers that work with distribution organisations and come in direct contact with food shall
have training in health and personal hygiene.
Schedule-II
(See regulation 7)
Record of surplus food to be maintained.-
(1) Name and address of the food donor organisation;
(2) Name and address of surplus food distribution organisation;
(3) Donation date;
(4) Name of the food product (item);
(5) Batch number of food product (item) ;
(6) Date of manufacturing;
(7) Best before date or expiry date;
(8) Quantity donated by food donor;
(9) Temperature of food;
(10) Quantity distributed by surplus food distribution organisation;
(11) Area where food is distributed;
(12 ) Date of distribution. 
