4. General principles.-
(1) Claims must be truthful, unambiguous, meaningful, not misleading and help consumers to comprehend
the information provided.
(2) Claims shall not encourage or condone excess consumption of a particular food.
(3) Claims shall not state, suggest or imply that a balanced and varied diet cannot provide appropriate
quantities of nutrients as required by the body.
(4) Where the claim benefit is related to or dependent on the method of preparation of the food the same
shall be provided on the label.
(5) Reduction of disease risk claims shall specify the number of servings of the food per day for the claimed
benefit.
(6) The claim that a food has certain nutritional or health attributes shall be scientifically substantiated by
validated methods of characterising or quantifying the ingredient or substance that is the basis for the
claim.
(7) Where the meaning of a trade mark, brand name or fancy name containing adjectives such as “natural”,
“fresh”, “pure”, “original”, “traditional”, “authentic”, “genuine”, “real”, appearing in the labelling, presentation or
advertising of a food is such that it is likely to mislead the consumer as to the nature of the food, in such cases a
disclaimer shall be mentioned prominently on the front of pack of the label stating that –
“*This is only a brand name or trademark, or fancy name and does not represent its true nature; (relevant one may
be chosen as applicable)” :
Provided that the font size of the above disclaimer shall not be less than 1.5 mm for principal display panel upto
100 cm2
, not less than 2 mm for principal display panel between 100-200 cm2
and not less 3 mm in case of
principal display panel above 200 cm2.
(8) All disclaimers related to a claim shall be conspicuous and legible.
(9) Notwithstanding the mandatory declaration of Food Safety and Standards Authority of India logo and
license number as per Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and Labelling) Regulations, 2011, no claim
or promotion of sale, supply, use and consumption of articles of foods shall be made using Food Safety and
Standards Authority of India logo and license number.
(10) Advertisements shall also not undermine the importance of healthy lifestyles.
 (11) Advertisements for food or beverages shall not be promoted or portrayed as a meal replacement unless
otherwise specifically permitted as a meal replacement under any other Regulations made under Food
Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (34 of 2006)
(12) Claims in advertisements shall be consistent with information on the label of the food or beverage.
(13) No advertisement shall be made for food products which is deceptive to the consumers.
(14) Every declaration which is required to be made on advertisements under these regulations shall be
conspicuous and legible.
5. Nutrition claims.-
(1) Nutrition claims may be.-
(a) nutrient content claim; or
(b) nutrient comparative claim
(2) The following do not constitute nutrition claims, namely:- 
(a) the mention of substances in the list of ingredients;
(b) the mention of nutrients as a mandatory part of nutrition labelling;
(c) quantitative or qualitative declaration of certain nutrients or ingredients on the label if required by
Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (34 of 2006) and the rules and regulations made thereunder.
(3) When a nutrient content or any synonymous claim is made for the nutrients indicated in Schedule-I, it shall be
made in accordance with the conditions specified in the said Schedule, provided flexibility in the wording of a
nutrition claim is as per Schedule-II, or the use of any other word, if they are in accordance with conditions
specified in Schedule-I and the meaning of the claim is not altered.
(4) Where a nutrient comparative claim is made, the foods shall be different versions of the same food or
similar foods being compared and shall be easily identifiable and the relative difference of the claimed
parameter between the compared foods is-
(a) at least thirty per cent. in the energy value or macronutrients content;
 (b) at least ten per cent. of the recommended dietary allowances per 100 g or 100 ml, for claims about
micronutrients other than sodium;
 (c) at least twenty-five per cent. in case of sodium, or the equivalent value for salt:
Provided that in case of salt when sold as such, then ten per cent. difference shall be acceptable.
(5) In addition, where a comparative claim is made, the identity of the foods being compared and the
amount of difference expressed as a percentage, fraction or an absolute amount shall be given in close
proximity to the claim.
(6) The equivalence claims in the form of phrases such as "contains the same amount of [nutrient] as a [food]"
and "as much [nutrient] as a [food]" may be used on the label or in the labeling of foods, provided that the amount
of the nutrient in the reference food is enough to qualify that food as a "source" of that nutrient, and the labeled
food, on per 100 g or 100 ml, is an equivalent source of that nutrient, or where the food nutrient is at the same
level as the naturally occurring reference food nutrient, the same shall be indicated on the label and through
nutritional information (e.g., "as much fibre as an apple," and "contains the same amount of vitamin C as ….. glass
of orange juice.").
6. Non-addition claims.-
(1) Non-addition of sugars.- (a) Claims regarding the non-addition of sugars to a food may be made if the
following conditions are met, namely:-
 (i) no sugars of any type have been added to the food (Examples: sucrose, glucose, honey,
 molasses, corn syrup, etc.);
 (ii) the food contains no ingredients that contain sugars as an ingredient (Examples: jams,
 jellies, sweetened chocolate, sweetened fruit pieces, etc.);
 (iii) the food contains no ingredients containing sugars that substitute for added sugars
 (Examples: non-reconstituted concentrated fruit juice, dried fruit paste, etc.); and
(iv) the sugars content of the food itself has not been increased above the amount contributed
by the ingredients by some other means (Example: the use of enzymes to hydrolyse starches
to release sugars).
(b) Claims regarding the non-addition of sugars to a food may also be made, where sugars are naturally
present in the food, and in such case the following indication shall also appear on the label.
‘CONTAINS NATURALLY OCCURRING SUGARS’.
(2) Non-addition of sodium salts. - Claims regarding the non-addition of sodium salts to a food, including “no
added salt”, may be made, if the following conditions are met, namely:
(a) the food contains no added sodium salts, including but not limited to sodium chloride and sodium tripolyphosphate;
(b) the food contains no ingredients that contain added sodium salts including but not limited to sauces, pickles,pepperoni, soya sauce, salted fish and fish sauce;
(c) the food contains no ingredients that contain sodium salts that are used to substitute for added salt,including but not limited to seaweed.’;

(3) Non-addition of additives. – Save as otherwise provided in any other regulations, the claims regarding the
non-addition of additives including functional classes of additives as specified in the Food Safety and Standards
(Food Product Standards and Food Additives) Regulations, 2011 to a food, may be made according to the
following conditions, namely:-
(a) has not been added to the food or removed from food at the time of manufacture;
(b) is not contained in any ingredient of the food, except where it is naturally present;
(c) is one which is allowed to be added in particular products as specified in the Food Safety and Standards
(Food Product Standards and Food Additives) Regulations, 2011; and
(d) has not been substituted by another additive giving the food equivalent characteristics.
(4) Additional conditions for non-addition claims.- The additional conditions or disclaimer statements
may be used with non-addition claims to assist consumer understanding of the claims provided that the
disclaimer statements shall be conspicuous and legible.
7. Health claims.- (1) Health claims shall comply with the following conditions and declarations, namely:-
(a) the health claim must consist of two parts, namely:-
(i) information on the physiological role of the nutrient or substance or an accepted diet- health
relationship; and
(ii) information on the composition of the product relevant to the physiological role of the
nutrient or substance or the accepted diet-health relationship unless the relationship is based on
a whole food or foods whereby the research does not link to specific constituents of the food;
(b) if the claimed benefit is attributed to a constituent in the food, for which a recommended dietary
allowance value is established, the food in question shall be-
(i) a source of or high in the constituent, in accordance with conditions specified in Schedule I,
in the case where increased consumption is recommended; or,
(ii) low in, reduced in or free of the constituent, in accordance with conditions specified in
Schedule I, in the case where reduced consumption is recommended;
(c) a statement of the quantity of a nutrient or a substance that is the subject of the claim, per 100g or
100ml or per pack (single consumption pack) of the food;
(d) where applicable, target group shall be mentioned or where a certain contraindication exists,
advice to vulnerable groups on consumption or avoidance of the food shall be made available;
(e) directions for use of the food to obtain the claimed benefit in the context of the diet and other
lifestyle factors where appropriate;
(f) maximum safe intake of the food or the constituent, if necessary.
(2) Nutrient function claims and other function claims may be made based on current relevant scientific
substantiation and to provide sufficient evidence on the type of claimed effect and the relationship to health
as recognised by generally accepted scientific review of the data and the scientific substantiation shall be
reviewed by food business operator as new knowledge becomes available and claims updated accordingly.
(3) No reduction of disease risk claims shall be made that is not in accordance with the conditions specified
in Schedule III.
(4) Food articles that are fortified as per Food Safety and Standards (Fortification of Foods) Regulations,
2018 may make health claims as provided in Schedule IV and flexibility in the wordings of the claim
statement is acceptable, if the meaning of the claim is not altered.
(5) Where a claimed health benefit is attributed directly to the product, it shall be based on statistically
significant results from well-designed human intervention studies, conducted by or under guidance of
established research institutions, in line with the principles of GCP (Good Clinical Practices) and peer
reviewed or published in a peer reviewed reputed scientific journal.
8. Claims related to dietary guidelines or healthy diets.- (1) claims may be made related to a “healthy diet” or
any synonymous term referring to the pattern of eating as per current Indian Council of Medical Research
Dietary Guidelines for Indians and the label shall carry a statement relating the food to the pattern of eating
described thereof.
(2) Foods, which are described as part of a healthy diet, balanced diet shall not be based on selective
consideration of one or more aspects of the food and shall also satisfy the criteria for other major nutrients
related to the current Indian Council of Medical Research Nutrient Requirements and Recommended
Dietary Allowances for Indians and Indian Council of Medical Research Dietary Guidelines for Indians,
based on scientific evidence.
(3) Foods shall not be described as “healthy” or be represented in a manner that implies that a food in and
of itself will impart health.
(4) Flexibility in the wordings is acceptable, if the claims remain faithful to the pattern of eating outlined in
the current Indian Council of Medical Research Nutrient Requirements and Recommended Dietary
Allowances for Indians and Indian Council of Medical Research Dietary Guidelines for Indians.
9. Conditional Claims.- (1) a claim may be made where a food is by its nature high or low or free of a specific
nutrient provided the name of the nutrient or substance is preceded by the words ‘natural or naturally’ in
the claim statement.
Explanation: “a naturally low (naming a nutrient or substance) food” or “a naturally (naming the nutrient
or the substance) free food”.
(2) claims containing adjectives such as “natural”, “fresh”, “pure”, “original”, “traditional”, “Authentic”,
“Genuine”, “Real”, etc. , when used, shall be in accordance with conditions laid down in Schedule V and
the claims containing words or phrases like “home-made”, “home cooked”, etc., which may give an
erroneous impression to the consumer shall not be used.
10. Prohibited claims.- (1) no claims shall be made which refer to the suitability of the food for use in the
prevention, alleviation, treatment or cure of a disease, disorder or particular physiological condition unless
specifically permitted under any other regulations made under Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (34 of
2006).
(2) There shall not appear in the label of any package, containing food for sale the words
“recommended by the medical or nutrition or health professionals” or any words which imply or
suggest that the food is recommended, prescribed, or approved by medical practitioners or approved for
medical purpose.
(3) No product shall claim the term “added nutrients”, if such nutrients have been added merely to compensate
the nutrients lost or removed during processing of the food
(4) Foods for special dietary uses or foods for special medical purposes shall not carry a claim unless
specifically permitted under any other regulations made under Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (34 of
2006).
(5) Claims which do give rise to doubt or suspicion about the safety of similar food or which may arouse fear
shall not be made.
(6) No health claims shall be made for foods that contain nutrients or constituents in quantity that increase the
risk of disease or an adverse health-related condition.
(7) No advertisements or claims for articles of foods shall be made by any food business operator that
undermines the products of any other manufacturer for the purpose of promoting their products or influencing
consumer behavior.
11.Approval of claims.- The food business operator or marketer shall seek prior approval from the Food
Authority for reduction of disease risk claims other than those that are defined and for which criteria are laid
out under these regulations or any other regulations made under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (34
of 2006). 
12. Procedure for approval of claims.- (1) The food business operator shall submit an application along with
applicable fees as prescribed by Food Safety and Standards Authority of India consisting of the following
information, namely:-
(i) Claim to be made;
(ii) Name of ingredient, nutrient or substance on the basis of which the claim is to be made;
(iii) Validated Method of analysis of ingredient or substance for which the claim is to be made;
(vi) Scientific information or materials substantiating the claim;
(v) How is the claim clear and meaningful and help consumers to comprehend the information
provided;
(vi) Well-designed human intervention studies in case of health claims conducted by or under
guidance of established research institutions; and
(vii) Any other useful information.
(2) The food authority itself or may appoint an agency or panel to carry out preliminary scrutiny of the
application submitted by food business operators or marketers for approval of their claims.
(3) On scrutiny, deficiencies, if any, shall be informed to applicant within ninety days from the date of receipt
of application and the applicant shall provide the information required by the food authority within thirty days
of the receipt of the communication, failing which the application shall be rejected without any further
reference.
(4) The fees paid by the applicant for recognition shall not be refunded under any circumstances.
(5) After scrutiny, the Food Authority may pass a speaking order either for approval or rejection of concerned
claims and may also suggest an amendment for the concerned claim.
(6) The amended claim referred to in sub-regulations (5) may be submitted to the Food Authority within thirty
days for reconsideration.
(7) In case of rejection, the food business operator or marketer shall not use that claim in their advertising and
marketing communication in respect of articles of food offered for sale or for promotion of sale, supply, use or
consumption.
13. Redressal of non-compliance.- (1) Any person who advertises or is a party to the publication of any
advertisement or claims not complying with this regulation shall be penalised as per section 53 of Food Safety
and Standards Act, 2006 (34 of 2006).
14. Procedure for redressal of non-compliance.- (1) The misleading claims shall be referred to the food
authority or the Food Authority may on its own motion take on file any misleading claim and the Food
Authority may itself analyse or may appoint an agency or panel to analyse such misleading claims.
(2) In case the agency or Food Authority requires information from the food business operator or marketer,
the food authority will seek clarification failing which action shall be initiated as per sub-regulation (1) of
regulation 13.
(3) The food business operator or the marketer shall submit the information sought for within thirty days from the
date of receipt of letter seeking clarification.
(4) After scrutiny of the submitted information, the officer nominated by the Authority shall pass a speaking
order within ninety days either for acceptance or rejection of submitted clarification on misleading claims.
(5) The Food Authority may also suggest an improvement for the concerned claim and the improved claim
shall be intimated to the Food Authority within forty- five days from the date of
receipt of notice of the suggested improvement of the claim from the Food Authority.
15. Corrective advertisement.- If an advertisement is found to be in violation of the provisions of these
regulations, the Food Authority may, by order, require the concerned food business operator or advertiser to
stop it immediately and to issue corrective advertisement within thirty days through the same medium for
neutralising the effect of such advertisement. 
SCHEDULE – I
[See regulation 5 (3) and (4) and regulation 7 (1)(b)]
NUTRITION CLAIMS
A claim that a food containing the nutrient mentioned in column (2) is likely to have the benefits as mentioned
in column (3) or has the same meaning for the consumer may be made subject to the conditions as mentioned
in column (4) below:


Energy/Calorie: Low energy foods contain not more than 40 kcal per 100 g for solids or 20 kcal per 100 ml for liquids. Free energy foods contain not more than 4 kcal per 100 ml for liquids.
Fat: Low-fat foods contain not more than 3 g of fat per 100 g for solids or 1.5 g of fat per 100 ml for liquids. Fat-free foods contain not more than 0.5 g of fat per 100 g for solids or 100 ml for liquids.
Cholesterol: Low-cholesterol foods contain not more than 20 mg cholesterol per 100 g for solids and 1.5 g saturated fat per 100 g for solids or 10 mg per 100 ml for liquids and 0.75 g of saturated fat per 100 ml for liquids, and in either case must provide not more than 10% of energy from saturated fat. Cholesterol-free foods contain not more than 5 mg cholesterol per 100 g for solids or 100 ml for liquids. Additionally, the food shall contain no more than 1.5 g saturated fat per 100 g for solids or 0.75 g of saturated fat per 100 ml for liquids and in either case must provide not more than 10% of energy from saturated fat.
Saturated fat: Low-saturated fat foods contain not more than 1.5 g per 100 g for solids or 0.75 g per 100 ml for liquids and in either case must provide not more than 10% of energy from saturated fat. Saturated fat-free foods have saturated fatty acids that do not exceed 0.1 g per 100 g or 100 ml of food.
Unsaturated fat: High unsaturated fat foods have at least 70% of the fatty acids present in the product derived from unsaturated fat under the condition that unsaturated fat provides more than 20% of the energy of the product.
Trans fat: Trans fat-free foods contain less than 0.2 g trans fat per 100 g or 100 ml of food.
MUFA: Foods high in MUFA shall only be made where at least 45% of the total fatty acids present in the product are derived from mono unsaturated fat and under the condition that monounsaturated fat provides more than 20% of the energy of the product.
PUFA: Foods high in PUFA shall only be made where at least 45% of the total fatty acids present in the product are derived from polyunsaturated fat and under the condition that polyunsaturated fat provides more than 20% of the energy of the product.
Omega 3 fatty acids: A source of Omega 3 fatty acids contains at least 0.3 g alpha-linolenic acid per 100 g and per 100 kcal, or at least 40 mg of the sum of eicosapentaenoic acid and docosahexaenoic acid per 100 g and per 100 kcal. Foods high in Omega 3 fatty acids contain at least 0.6 g alpha-linolenic acid per 100 g and per 100 kcal, or at least 80 mg of the sum of eicosapentaenoic acid and docosahexaenoic acid per 100 g and per 100 kcal.
Sugars: Low-sugar foods contain not more than 5 g of sugars per 100 g for solids or 2.5 g of sugars per 100 ml for liquids. Sugar-free foods contain not more than 0.5 g of sugars per 100 g for solids or 100 ml for liquids.
Protein: A source of protein provides 10% of RDA per 100 g for solids, 5% of RDA per 100 ml for liquids, or 5% of RDA per 100 kcal. Foods rich or high in protein provide 20% of RDA per 100 g for solids, 10% of RDA per 100 ml for liquids, or 10% of RDA per 100 kcal.
Vitamin(s) and/or Mineral(s): A source of vitamins and/or minerals provides at least 15% of RDA of the vitamin/mineral per 100 g for solids or 7.5% of RDA of the vitamin/mineral per 100 ml for liquids. Foods high in vitamins and/or minerals provide at least 30% of RDA per 100 g for solids or 15% of RDA per 100 ml for liquids.
Sodium: Low sodium products contain not more than 0.12 g of sodium per 100 g for solids or 100 ml for liquids. Very low sodium products contain not more than 0.04 g of sodium per 100 g for solids or 100 ml for liquids. Sodium-free products contain not more than 0.005 g of sodium per 100 g for solids or 100 ml for liquids.
Dietary fibre: A source of dietary fibre contains at least 3 g of fibre per 100 g or 1.5 g per 100 kcal. Foods high or rich in dietary fibre contain at least 6 g per 100 g or 3 g per 100 kcal.
Probiotics: A source of probiotics contains ≥10^8 CFU in the recommended serving size per day.
Glycemic index (GI): Low GI foods have a GI value below 55. A food’s GI indicates the rate at which the carbohydrate in the food is broken down into glucose and absorbed from the gut into the blood and expressed as a percent of the response to the same amount of carbohydrate from a standard food, white bread.
1. Coconut Oil: Contains medium chain fatty acids that are easily metabolized.
2. Corn Oil: Rich in Omega-6 Poly Unsaturated Fatty Acid (Omega-6 PUFA, linoleic acid); linoleic acid is an essential fatty acid that helps to maintain normal blood cholesterol levels.
3. Cottonseed Oil: Rich in Omega-6 Poly Unsaturated Fatty Acid (Omega-6 PUFA, linoleic acid); linoleic acid is an essential fatty acid that helps to maintain normal blood cholesterol levels; contains tocopherols which are natural antioxidants.
4. Groundnut Oil: Contains Mono Unsaturated Fatty Acid (MUFA) and Omega-6 Poly Unsaturated Fatty Acid (Omega-6 PUFA) that helps lowering of cholesterol; contains tocopherols which are natural antioxidants.
5. Linseed/Flax Seed Oil: Rich in Omega-3 Poly Unsaturated Fatty Acid (Omega-3 PUFA, Alpha linolenic acid); alpha linolenic acid is an essential fatty acid that contributes to the maintenance of normal blood cholesterol levels.
6. Mustard/Rapeseed Oil (Low Erucic): Rich in Mono Unsaturated Fatty Acid (MUFA) that helps to maintain blood cholesterol levels; contains Omega-3 Poly Unsaturated Fatty Acid (Omega-3 PUFA, Alpha linolenic acid); alpha linolenic acid is an essential fatty acid that contributes to the maintenance of normal blood cholesterol levels.
7. Mustard Oil: Contains Omega-3 Poly Unsaturated Fatty Acid (Omega-3 PUFA); alpha linolenic acid is an essential fatty acid that contributes to the maintenance of normal blood cholesterol levels; contains tocopherols which are natural antioxidants.
8. Olive Oil/Olive Pomace Oil/Extra Virgin Olive Oil: Rich in Mono Unsaturated Fatty Acid (MUFA) that helps to maintain blood cholesterol levels; contains polyphenols which are natural antioxidants.
9. Safflower Oil: Rich in Omega-6 Poly Unsaturated Fatty Acid (Omega-6 PUFA, linoleic acid); linoleic acid is an essential fatty acid that helps to maintain normal blood cholesterol levels.
10. Palm Kernel Oil: Contains medium chain fatty acids that are easily metabolized.
11. Palmolein Oil: Contains tocopherols and tocotrienols which are natural antioxidants.
12. Rice Bran Oil: Contains MUFA and Omega-6 Poly Unsaturated Fatty Acid (Omega-6 PUFA) that helps lowering of cholesterol; contains oryzanol, tocopherols and tocotrienols which are natural antioxidants; oryzanol has antioxidant properties and reduces high blood cholesterol.
13. Sesame Oil: Contains equal proportions of MUFA (oleic acid) and Omega-6 Poly Unsaturated Fatty Acid (Omega-6 PUFA, linoleic acid) that helps lowering of cholesterol; contains lignans which are natural antioxidants; contains tocopherols which are natural antioxidants.
14. Soybean Oil: Contains Omega-6 Poly Unsaturated Fatty Acid (Omega-6 PUFA, linoleic acid) and Omega-3 Poly Unsaturated Fatty Acid (Omega-3 PUFA, alpha linolenic acid) in appropriate proportions suggested by RDA guidelines of ICMR; linoleic acid is an essential fatty acid that helps to maintain normal blood cholesterol levels; alpha linolenic acid is an essential fatty acid that contributes to the maintenance of normal blood cholesterol levels; contains tocopherols which are natural antioxidants.
15. Sunflower Oil: Rich in Omega-6 Poly Unsaturated Fatty Acid (Omega-6 PUFA, linoleic acid); linoleic acid is an essential fatty acid that helps to maintain normal blood cholesterol levels; contains tocopherols which are natural antioxidants.

SCHEDULE – III: HEALTH CLAIMS
For calcium or calcium and vitamin D and osteoporosis, the food must be a source or high in calcium or in calcium and vitamin D, and a statement that the beneficial effect is obtained with a daily recommended intake (RDA). The claim statement is: Adequate calcium (or calcium and vitamin D) intake throughout life, through a balanced diet, is essential for bone health and to reduce the risk of osteoporosis.
For sodium and hypertension, the food must be low in sodium (0.12g sodium/100g or 100ml) and include a statement that the beneficial effect is obtained with a low sodium diet. The claim statement is: Diets low in sodium may help in reducing the risk of high blood pressure.
For dietary saturated fat and blood cholesterol level, the food must be low in saturated fat and include a statement that the beneficial effect is obtained with a diet low in fat, saturated fat, and physical activity. The claim statement is: Diets low in saturated fat contribute to the maintenance of normal blood cholesterol levels.
For potassium and the risk of high blood pressure, the food must be a good source of potassium and low in sodium, total fat, and saturated fat. The claim statement is: Diets containing good sources of potassium and low in sodium, fat, and saturated fat may help reduce the risk of high blood pressure.
For alpha-linolenic acid (ALA) and blood cholesterol level, the food must contain at least 1g of omega-3 fatty acids per 100g or 100ml or 100kcal and include a statement that the beneficial effect is obtained with a daily intake of 2g of ALA. The claim statement is: Alpha-linolenic acid (ALA) contributes to the maintenance of normal blood cholesterol levels.
For soluble dietary fibre and lipid profile, the food must contain soluble dietary fibre from sources including but not limited to oats, barley, millets, or mixtures thereof, contain at least 1g per serving, and include a statement that the beneficial effect is obtained with a daily intake of 3g of soluble dietary fibre. The claim statement is: Soluble dietary fibre taken as part of a diet may help in the maintenance of a normal lipid profile.
For phytosterol or stanol and lipid profile, the food must contain at least 1g of plant sterols or stanols per serving and include a statement that the beneficial effect is obtained with a daily intake of up to 3g per day. The claim statement is: Foods containing plant sterols or stanols (as applicable) containing at least 1g of plant sterols or stanols eaten twice a day with meals for a daily intake of up to 3g may help in improving the lipid profile.
For beta-glucans (oats, barley) and blood glucose, the food must be oats and/or barley, contain at least 4g beta-glucans for each 30g of available carbohydrates in the quantified portion, and include a statement that it is taken as part of the meal. The claim statement is: Beta-glucans from oats or barley when taken as part of a meal may help in the reduction of the rise in blood glucose after that meal.

SCHEDULE – IV: Health Claims for Fortified Food Articles

Vitamin A helps against night blindness.
Vitamin D supports strong bones.
Vitamin B12 is important for maintaining normal functioning of the nervous system and blood formation.
Folate and folic acid are important  for  blood formation.
Iron fights anemia.
Iodine is required for normal growth, thyroid, and brain function.
Zinc supports a healthy immune system.
Thiamine is required for normal nerve and heart function.
Riboflavin is necessary to release the energy from food.
Niacin is necessary to release the energy from food.
Pyridoxine is necessary to release the energy from food.

SCHEDULE – V: Use of certain words or phrases

The word "natural" may be used to describe a single food, derived from a recognized source such as a plant, animal, microorganism, or mineral, to which nothing has been added and which has been subjected only to processing that renders it suitable for human consumption, including smoking without chemicals, cooking processes such as roasting, blanching, dehydration, physical refining, freezing, concentration, pasteurization, sterilization, and fermentation, and packaging done without chemicals and preservatives. Permitted food additives that are obtained from natural sources by appropriate physical processing can also be described as "natural." Composite foods shall not themselves be described directly or by implication as "natural," but such foods may be described as "made from natural ingredients" if all the ingredients or food additives meet the criteria in (a) and (b) above. The above principles shall also apply to the use of other words or expressions such as "real" or "genuine" when used in place of "natural" in a way that implies similar benefits. Claims such as "natural goodness," "naturally better," or "nature's way" shall not be used.

The term "fresh" shall only be used on products which have not been processed in any manner except washing, peeling, chilling, trimming, cutting, irradiating by ionizing radiation not exceeding 1kGy, or other processing necessary for making the product safe for consumption without altering its basic characteristics in any manner. The term "fresh" or "freshly" shall have no other connotation than the immediacy of the action being described. A food containing additives or subjected to packaging, storing, or other supply chain processes that control freshness shall not be termed as "freshly stored" or "freshly packed." "Fresh" may be permitted to be used along with "frozen" if it is clear from the context, such as "frozen from fresh," "fresh frozen," or "freshly frozen," indicating that the food was quickly frozen while still fresh.

The term "pure" shall only be used to describe a single ingredient food to which nothing has been added and which is free from avoidable contamination, with levels of unavoidable contaminants below the levels prescribed in the Food Safety and Standards (Contaminants, Toxins, and Residues) Regulations, 2011, or any other standard under the Food Safety and Standards Act, Rules, and Regulations. Compound foods shall not generally be described directly or by implication as "pure," but such foods may be described as "made with pure ingredients" if all the ingredients meet the criteria in (a) above. 
The terms "authentic," "genuine," and "real" may be used only if the label or advertisement clarifies in what way the overall quality is tangibly justified and why the particular term has been used.

The term "traditional" shall demonstrably be used to describe a recipe, fundamental formulation, or processing method for a product that has existed for a generation (thirty years) and has remained substantially unchanged during that period.

The term "original" shall only be used to describe a food made to a formulation, the origin of which can be traced and that has remained essentially unchanged over time. It should not contain replacements for major ingredients. It may also be used to describe a process, provided it is the process first used in the making of the food and has remained essentially unchanged over time, even if mass-produced. To be termed "original," a product shall not have changed to any material degree and shall remain available as the "standard" product when new variants are introduced. A product reintroduced onto the market after a period of absence shall only be described as "original" if it can be shown to meet these criteria.